# Day 2 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 2 - Rust Roadmap](#day-2---rust-roadmap)
  - [Functions](#functions)
    - [Parameters](#parameters)
    - [Statements and Expressions](#statements-and-expressions)
    - [Return values](#return-values)
  - [Comments](#comments)
  - [Control flow - Branching](#control-flow---branching)
    - [`if` expressions](#if-expressions)
    - [`else` and `else if`](#else-and-else-if)
    - [`if` and `let` statement](#if-and-let-statement)
  - [Control flow - Loops](#control-flow---loops)
    - [`loop`](#loop)
      - [Exiting a loop with a value](#exiting-a-loop-with-a-value)
      - [Loop labels](#loop-labels)
    - [`while` statement](#while-statement)
    - [`for` statement](#for-statement)
      - [Iterate over an array](#iterate-over-an-array)
      - [Iterate over a range](#iterate-over-a-range)
  - [Resources](#resources)
  - [Exercises](#exercises)
    - [Note: `std::io`](#note-stdio)
    - [Hands-on exercises](#hands-on-exercises)
  - [Key concepts](#key-concepts)

## Functions

Likely the most popular programming languages, also Rust supports functions. Their declaration can be made through the keyword `fn`, followed by the function's name and, if needed, parameters. The return type is also declared after an arrow `->`. Conventionally, a **snake case** is used for function names.

```rust
fn function_name() {
    // function body
}
```

### Parameters

Functions can receive parameters, which are declared inside the parentheses. The parameter's type must be declared after the parameter's name, separated by a colon `:`. If the function has multiple parameters, they must be separated by commas. Parameter's type cannot be omitted.

```rust
fn example_function(param1: i32, param2: f64) {
    // function body
}
```

### Statements and Expressions

In Rust, functions can contain statements and expressions. Statements are instructions that perform some action and do not return a value. Expressions evaluate to a resulting value.

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5; // statement
    let y = (let z = 6); // error: expected expression, found statement (`let`)
}
```

In the example above, `let x = 5;` is a statement that assigns the value `5` to the variable `x`. On the other hand, `let y = (let z = 6);` is an error because the inner `let z = 6;` is a statement, not an expression.

However, expressions can be used in statements:

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5; // statement
    let y = {
        let z = 6; // statement
        z + 1 // expression
    };
}
```

Note that the line `z + 1` does not end with a semicolon `;`, making it an expression that returns the value `7`. This is a common pattern in Rust to create blocks that evaluate to a value.

### Return values

The return type of a function is declared after an arrow `->`. If the function does not return a value, the return type can be omitted.

There are two different ways to return a value from a function:

```rust
fn add(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
    x + y // expression, does not end with a semicolon
}

fn another_add(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
    return x + y; // statement, ends with a semicolon
}

```

Note that if we write the following code:

```rust
fn add(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
    x + y;
}
```

we will get a compilation error because the function is expected to return a value of type `i32`, but the expression `x + y;` does not return a value because of the semicolon `;` at the end.

In Rust it's possible to return multiple values from a function using tuples:

```rust
fn get_name() -> (&str, &str) {
    ("John", "Doe")
}
```

These values can be accessed as tuples:

```rust
fn main() {
    let full_name = get_name();
    println!("First name: {full_name.0}, Last name: {full_name.1}");
}
```

## Comments

We already have seen comments in the previous lessons. They are used to document the code and are ignored by the compiler. Comments can be single-line or multi-line.

```rust
fn main() {
    // This is a single-line comment

    /*
    This is a
    multi-line
    comment
    */
}
```

Comments are also used to build documentation for the code. Rust has a built-in documentation tool called `rustdoc` that generates HTML documentation from the comments in the code. For further details on using comments for documentation, refer to the [Rust documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/comments.html).

## Control flow - Branching

### `if` expressions

Syntax for `if` expressions is as follows:

```rust
if some_arm_condition {
    // code to execute if the condition is true
} 
```

The expressiona checked in the `if` statement are called **arms**, and they **must be boolean**: indeed, Rust does not perform implicit conversion to boolean.

```rust
let x = 5;
if x {
    // error: expected `bool`, found integer
}
```

### `else` and `else if`

The `else` keyword is used to execute code when the `if` condition is false. The `else if` keyword is used to check multiple conditions.

```rust
let x = 5;
if x > 5 {
    println!("x is greater than 5");
} else if x < 5 {
    println!("x is less than 5");
} else {
    println!("x is equal to 5");
}
```

Pay attention, for sake of readability, to not use too many `else if` statements. In case of multiple conditions, consider using a `match` statement instead, which will be covered in the next lessons.

### `if` and `let` statement

The `if` expression can be used in a `let` statement to assign different values based on a condition.

```rust
let condition = true;
let number = if condition {
    5
} else {
    6
};
let another_number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 }; // same behavior as above
```

In any case, the types of the values assigned in the `if` and `else` blocks must be the same. The follow snippet shows a forbidden behavior:

```rust
let condition = true;
let number = if condition {
    5
} else {
    "six" // error: expected integer, found `&str`
};
```

We also can use `let` in an `if` statement to shadow a variable whithin the `if` scope, which is useful when a function can return a `None` value:

```rust
if let Some(value) = some_function() {
    println!("Value: {}", value);
} else {
    println!("Function returned None");
}
```

In the example above, a variable `value` is created and assigned the value returned by the `some_function()` if it returns `Some(value)`. If the function returns `None`, the `else` block is executed.

## Control flow - Loops

### `loop`

The `loop` keyword is used to create an infinite loop. To exit the loop, we can use the `break` keyword.

```rust
loop {
    println!("This is an infinite loop");
    break;
}
```

#### Exiting a loop with a value

The `break` keyword can also be used to return a value from the loop:

```rust
let mut counter = 0;
let result = loop {
    counter += 1;
    if counter == 10 {
        break counter * 2;
    }
};
println!("The result is: {}", result); // 20
```

In the example above, the loop increments the `counter` variable until it reaches `10`. When the condition is met, the loop breaks and returns the value `counter * 2`.

#### Loop labels

Rust allows us to label loops to break out of a specific loop when there are nested loops. The syntax for a loop label is as follows:

```rust
'outer: loop {
    'inner: loop {
        break 'outer; // breaks the outer loop
    }
}
```

We can use the loop label to break out of the outer loop from the inner loop.

```rust
let mut count = 0;
'counting_up: loop {
    println!("count = {count}");
    let mut remaining = 10;
    loop {
        println!("remaining = {remaining}");
        if remaining == 9 {
            break;
        }
        if count == 2 {
            break 'counting_up;
        }
        remaining -= 1;
    }
    count += 1;
}
println!("End count = {count}");
```

### `while` statement

The `while` keyword is used to create a loop that executes as **long as a condition is true**.

```rust
let mut counter = 0;
while counter < 10 {
    println!("Counter: {counter}");
    counter += 1;
}
```

### `for` statement

The `for` keyword is used to iterate over a collection of items, such as an array or a range. Advanced iterators are very powerful, and they will be covered in the next lessons.

#### Iterate over an array

```rust
let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

for element in a {
    println!("the value is: {element}");
}
```

#### Iterate over a range

A range is a sequence of numbers that can be generated using the `..` operator. The range is inclusive on the lower bound and exclusive on the upper bound.

```rust
for number in 1..5 {
    println!("the number is: {number}");
}
```

Some special funcitons can be applied to ranges, such as `rev()` to reverse the range:

```rust
for number in (1..5).rev() {
    println!("the number is: {number}");
}
```

Intuitively, the code will print the numbers from `4` to `1`.

## Resources

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 3.3: Functions
- 3.4: Comments
- 3.5: Control flow

## Exercises

### Note: `std::io`

You should use the library `std::io` to read user input. The library is part of the Rust standard library and is used to read and write data from the console. A possible way to read an integer from the console is as follows:

```rust
use std::io;

fn main() {
    let mut input = String::new();
    io::stdin().read_line(&mut input).expect("Failed to read line");
    let number: i32 = input.trim().parse().expect("Please type a number");
    println!("You typed: {number}");
}
```

For now, don't worry about the details of the code above. We will cover it in the next lessons.

### Hands-on exercises

1. Write a function that takes an integer as a parameter and returns a boolean indicating whether the number is even.
2. Write a function to calculate the nth Fibonacci number.
3. Write a function to calculate the factorial of a number.
4. Create a program that implements a little menu:
        1. calculate the nth Fibonacci number
        2. calculate the factorial of a number
        3. Return both the Fibonacci and factorial of a number from the same function
        4. Exit

## Key concepts

- Functions are declared using the `fn` keyword.
- Functions can have **parameters** and **return values**.
- Parameters must have a type declaration.
- The return type of a function is declared after an arrow `->`.
- `if` expressions are used to branch the code based on a condition.
- `else` and `else if` are used to execute code when the `if` condition is false.
- `loop` is used to create an infinite loop.
- `while` is used to create a loop that executes as long as a condition is true.
- `for` is used to iterate over a collection of items.
- Ranges are sequences of numbers that can be generated using the `..` operator.
- Labels can be used to break out of a specific loop when there are nested loops.
