# Day 12 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 12 - Rust Roadmap](#day-12---rust-roadmap)
  - [Defining an `enum`](#defining-an-enum)
    - [Enum Values](#enum-values)
    - [`enum` vs `struct` in action](#enum-vs-struct-in-action)
  - [`Option` Enum](#option-enum)
    - [Why `Option`?](#why-option)
  - [The `match` Control Flow Construct](#the-match-control-flow-construct)
    - [Different types in arms](#different-types-in-arms)
    - [Pattern that bind to values](#pattern-that-bind-to-values)
    - [Matching with `Option<T>`](#matching-with-optiont)
    - [Exhaustive Matching](#exhaustive-matching)
    - [Catching all the rest](#catching-all-the-rest)
  - [References](#references)

## Defining an `enum`

An `enum` is a type that can have a fixed set of values, called **variants**. Here's an example:

```rust
enum IpAddrKind {
    V4,
    V6,
}
```

In this example, `IpAddrKind` is an `enum` with two variants: `V4` and `V6`, which describe all the possible values that an `IpAddrKind` instance can have. From now on, we can create refer `IpAddrKind` as a custom type, and create instances of it.

### Enum Values

We can create instances of an `enum` by using the `::` syntax:

```rust
let four = IpAddrKind::V4;
let six = IpAddrKind::V6;
```

The `::` operator is needed because the variants are namespaced under the `IpAddrKind` type: this is useful because now both `V4` and `V6` are part of the same `enum`, and we can use them without any ambiguity.

Another advantage of using `enum`s is that we can use them in `struct`s: at the moment we don't have a way to store the actual IP address data. For this reason, we can define a `struct` that uses an `enum` to store the IP address kind:

```rust
enum IpAddrKind {
    V4,
    V6,
}

struct IpAddr {
    kind: IpAddrKind,
    address: String,
}

fn main() {
    let home = IpAddr {
        kind: IpAddrKind::V4,
        address: String::from("127.0.0.1"),
    };

    let loopback = IpAddr {
        kind: IpAddrKind::V6,
        address: String::from("::1"),
    };
}
```

In this example, we defined an `IpAddr` `struct` that has two fields: `kind`, which is an `IpAddrKind` instance, and `address`, which is a `String` instance. We then created two instances of `IpAddr`, `home` and `loopback`, that have different values for the `kind` and `address` fields.

In fact, we can even define an `enum` with data inside its variants:

```rust
enum IpAddr {
    V4(String),
    V6(String),
}

fn main() {
    let home = IpAddr::V4(String::from("127.0.0.1"));
    let loopback = IpAddr::V6(String::from("::1"));
}
```

Another way to store data whithin an `enum` is to use a different type for each variant:

```rust
enum IpAddr {
    V4(u8, u8, u8, u8),
    V6(String),
}

fn main() {
    let home = IpAddr::V4(127, 0, 0, 1);
    let loopback = IpAddr::V6(String::from("::1"));
}
```

Note that even if it already exists an official definition for IP addresses in the standard library, which is exactly the same we saw in the previous examples, we can still use our own definition as far as we don't brought the standard library's definition into scope.

### `enum` vs `struct` in action

Let's see a more practical example of the difference between `enum`s and `struct`s. We can define a `Message` `struct` that can hold different types of messages:

```rust
enum Message {
    Quit,
    Move { x: i32, y: i32 },
    Write(String),
    ChangeColor(i32, i32, i32),
}
```

Defining the same concept using a `struct` would be a bit more verbose:

```rust
struct QuitMessage; // unit struct
struct MoveMessage {
    x: i32,
    y: i32,
}
struct WriteMessage(String); // tuple struct
struct ChangeColorMessage(i32, i32, i32); // tuple struct
```

In this example, we defined an `enum` with four variants, each of which has a different type of data associated with it. We then defined a `struct` for each variant, and we can see that the `enum` is more concise and expressive than the `struct`s. Moreover, each struct has a different type, while all the variants of the `enum` have the same type, which is `Message`.

A similarity between `enum`s and `struct`s is that we can define methods for `enum`s as well:

```rust
impl Message {
    fn call(&self) {
        // method body would be defined here
    }
}

fn main() {
    let m = Message::Write(String::from("hello"));
    m.call();
}
```

Like `struct`s, we can define methods for `enum`s using the `impl` keyword, and we can use the `self` keyword to refer to the instance of the `enum` that we're calling the method on.

## `Option` Enum

The `Option` `enum` is a very useful type that is defined by the standard library. It is used when a value could be something or nothing. Here's its definition:

```rust
enum Option<T> {
    Some(T),
    None,
}
```

### Why `Option`?

By design choice, Rust does not have a `null` value, which is a common source of bugs in other languages. Instead, Rust has an `Option` type that can be either `Some` with a value or `None`: they respectively represent the presence or absence of a value. This way, we can handle the absence of a value in a safe way, without the risk of causing a null pointer exception.

We can see a particular notation in the definition of `Option`: the `<T>` syntax is a generic type parameter, which means that the `Option` type can hold any type of value. This is useful because we can use `Option` with any type we want, and we can define functions that return `Option` values without having to specify the type of the value.

Here's an example of how we can use `Option`:

```rust
fn main() {
    let some_number = Some(5);
    let some_string = Some("a string");

    let absent_number: Option<i32> = None;
}
```

Given the `<T>` syntax, we can define `Option` instances with different types of values, without having to specify the type of the value. However, there are cases where the compiler cannot infer the type of the value, so we have to specify it explicitly, like in the `absent_number` example.

But how this new mechanism can help us to avoid null pointer exceptions? Let's see an example:

```rust
fn main() {
    let x: i8 = 5;
    let y: Option<i8> = Some(5);

    let sum = x + y;
}
```

Compiling this code, we'll get the following error:

```shell
error[E0277]: cannot add `Option<i8>` to `i8`
 --> src/main.rs:5:17
  |
5 |     let sum = x + y;
  |                 ^ no implementation for `i8 + Option<i8>`
  |
  = help: the trait `Add<Option<i8>>` is not implemented for `i8`
  = help: the following other types implement trait `Add<Rhs>`:
            `&'a i8` implements `Add<i8>`
            `&i8` implements `Add<&i8>`
            `i8` implements `Add<&i8>`
            `i8` implements `Add`

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0277`.
error: could not compile `enums` (bin "enums") due to 1 previous error
```

In fact, an `Option<i8>` and an `i8` are two different types, and Rust does not allow us to add them together. Indeed, we have to convert the `Option<i8>` to an `i8` before we can add them together, thus we are forced to handle the case where `y` is `None`. This way, we can avoid null pointer exceptions and write safer code.

There are a lot of methods implemented for `Option` that can help us to handle the presence or absence of a value. For example, we can use the `unwrap` method to get the value of an `Option` instance, but this method will panic if the instance is `None`. We can also use the `expect` method, which is similar to `unwrap`, but it allows us to specify a custom panic message. We can also use the `match` keyword to handle the presence or absence of a value in a more controlled way. A more detailed explanation of these methods can be found in the [official documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html).

## The `match` Control Flow Construct

We have already seen the `match` keyword in the previous examples; however, being one of the most powerful control flow constructs in Rust, it deserves a more detailed explanation, which will not end in this lesson.

### Different types in arms

One big difference between `if-else` and `match` is that in the latter, we can evaluate expressions that don't are `Boolean`:

```rust
enum Coin {
    Penny,
    Nickel,
    Dime,
    Quarter,
}

fn value_in_cents(coin: Coin) -> u8 {
    match coin {
        Coin::Penny => 1,
        Coin::Nickel => 5,
        Coin::Dime => 10,
        Coin::Quarter => 25,
    }
}
```

### Pattern that bind to values

We can also use the `match` keyword to bind values to variables:

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
enum EUState {
    Italy,
    France,
    Germany,
    ...
}

enum Cash {
    five_euro,
    ten_euro,
    //...
    ten_cent(EUState),
    twenty_cent(EUState),
    //...
}

fn value_in_cents(cash: Cash) -> u8 {
    match cash {
        Cash::five_euro => 5,
        Cash::ten_euro => 10,
        Cash::ten_cent(state) => {
            println!("Ten cents from {:?}", state);
            10
        },
        Cash::twenty_cent(state) => {
            println!("Twenty cents from {:?}", state);
            20
        },
    }
}
```

In this example, we defined an `enum` called `EUState` that represents some European countries. We then defined an `enum` called `Cash` that represents some cash values, and we used the `match` keyword to bind the `EUState` value to a variable called `state`. This way, we can use the `state` variable inside the `match` block, and we can also print it using the `println!` macro.

### Matching with `Option<T>`

In the previous examples, we used `enum` variants as patterns in the `match` keyword. However, we can also use `Option` instances as patterns:

```rust
fn plus_one(x: Option<i32>) -> Option<i32> {
    match x {
        None => None,
        Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
    }
}
```

In this example, we defined a function called `plus_one` that takes an `Option<i32>` instance and returns another `Option<i32>` instance. We then used the `match` keyword to pattern match the `Option` instance, and we used the `None` and `Some` patterns to handle the presence or absence of a value. This way, we can write safer code that handles the absence of a value in a controlled way.

### Exhaustive Matching

One of the most powerful features of the `match` keyword is that it forces us to handle all the possible cases of an `enum`. This way, we can write safer code that handles all the possible values of an `enum`, and we can avoid bugs that could arise from missing cases. If we don't handle all the possible cases of an `enum`, the compiler will give us an error:

```rust
fn plus_one(x: Option<i32>) -> Option<i32> {
    match x {
        Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
    }
}
```

Compiling this code, we'll get the following error:

```shell
error[E0004]: non-exhaustive patterns: `None` not covered
   --> src/main.rs:3:15
    |
3   |         match x {
    |               ^ pattern `None` not covered
    |
note: `Option<i32>` defined here
   --> file:///home/.rustup/toolchains/1.82/lib/rustlib/src/rust/library/core/src/option.rs:571:1
    |
571 | pub enum Option<T> {
    | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
...
575 |     None,
    |     ---- not covered
    = note: the matched value is of type `Option<i32>`
help: ensure that all possible cases are being handled by adding a match arm with a wildcard pattern or an explicit pattern as shown
    |
4   ~             Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
5   ~             None => todo!(),
    |

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0004`.
error: could not compile `enums` (bin "enums") due to 1 previous error
```

The compiler understands that we didn't handle the `None` case, and it gives us an error. This way, we can write safer code that handles all the possible values of an `enum`, and we can avoid bugs that could arise from missing cases.

### Catching all the rest

We can also use the `_` pattern to catch all the rest of the cases:

```rust
fn is_a_coin(coin: Coin) -> bool {
    match coin {
        Cash::five_euro => false,
        Cash::ten_euro => false,
        //...
        _ => true,
    }
}
```

In this example, we used the `_` pattern to catch all the rest of the cases that we didn't handle explicitly. This way, we can write more concise code that handles all the possible values of an `enum`, and we can avoid bugs that could arise from missing cases.

## References

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 6.1: Defining an `enum`
- 6.2: The `Option` Enum

From the official documentation:

- [The `Option` Enum](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html)