# Day 8 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 8 - Rust Roadmap](#day-8---rust-roadmap)
  - [`Slice` type](#slice-type)
    - [String slices](#string-slices)
    - [String Literal as Slice](#string-literal-as-slice)
    - [Other slices](#other-slices)
    - [Exercises](#exercises)

## `Slice` type

By definition:

> A slice is an **immutable** reference to a contiguous sequence of elements in a collection.

Let's see the concept in action. Let's rewritethe second exercise in [day 1 - week 2](../day-1/2-01.md#exercises):

```rust
fn first_word(s: String) -> (String, String) {
    let mut first = String::new();
    let mut rest = String::new();
    let mut found_space = false;

    for c in s.chars() {
        if c == ' ' && !found_space {
            found_space = true;
        } else if found_space {
            rest.push(c);
        } else {
            first.push(c);
        }
    }

    (first, rest)
}
```

The function above is not efficient because it takes ownership of the `String` passed as argument, and then returns the entire `String` as the first word and the rest of the `String` as the second word. We can improve this function by using slices, whose type is `&str`.

```rust
fn first_word(s: &str) -> (&str, &str) {
    let mut first = 0;
    let mut rest = 0;
    let mut found_space = false;

    for (i, c) in s.chars().enumerate() {
        if c == ' ' && !found_space {
            found_space = true;
            rest = i + 1;
        } else if found_space {
            rest = i;
        } else {
            first = i;
        }
    }

    (&s[..first], &s[rest..])
}
```

By using slices, we can now pass a reference to the `String` instead of taking ownership of it, thus making the function more efficient. Following the same logic, we can also return a reference to the `String` instead of the entire `String`.

### String slices

If we consider a `String`, we can think of a slice as a reference to a part of the `String`. The syntax for a slice is `&[start..end]`, where `start` is the index of the first element in the slice, and `end` is the index of the element after the last element in the slice. For example:

```rust
let s = String::from("hello world");

let hello = &s[0..5]; // "hello"
let world = &s[6..11];// "world"
```

Note that the `end` index is exclusive, meaning that the element at the `end` index is not included in the slice.

In Rust, we can also use the `..` operator to omit the `start` or `end` index. For example:

```rust
let s = String::from("hello world");

let hello = &s[..5]; // "hello"
let world = &s[6..]; // "world"
let hello_world = &s[..]; // "hello world"
```

Omitting the `start` and/or `end` index will default to the beginning and/or end of the `String`, respectively.

### String Literal as Slice

String literals are slices, which means that they are references to the binary data stored in the program's binary: for this very reason:

- literal's type is `&str`, not `String`
- string literals are immutable, since slices are immutable references

### Other slices

Slices can also be used with other types of collections, such as arrays. For example:

```rust
let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let slice = &a[1..3]; // [2, 3]
```

In this case, `slice` is a reference to a part of the array `a`, starting at index `1` and ending at index `3` (exclusive).

### Exercises

1. Write a function that split a multi-line string into a vector of slices, where each slice is a line of the string, ignoring the newline character and empty lines.
2. Write a function that takes an array and a size, and returns the sub-slices of the array with the given size whose sum is the maximum possible.
