# Day 17 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 17 - Rust Roadmap](#day-17---rust-roadmap)
  - [Traits: Defining Shared Behavior](#traits-defining-shared-behavior)
    - [The Purpose of Traits](#the-purpose-of-traits)
    - [Implementing a Trait on a Type](#implementing-a-trait-on-a-type)
    - [Restrictions on Implementing Traits](#restrictions-on-implementing-traits)
  - [Default Implementations](#default-implementations)
  - [Traits as Parameters](#traits-as-parameters)
    - [Trait Bound Syntax](#trait-bound-syntax)
    - [Multiple Trait Bounds](#multiple-trait-bounds)
    - [`where` clause](#where-clause)
  - [Returning Types that Implement Traits](#returning-types-that-implement-traits)
  - [Using Trait Bounds to Conditionally Implement Methods](#using-trait-bounds-to-conditionally-implement-methods)
    - [Blanket Implementations](#blanket-implementations)
    - [Benefits of Trait Bounds](#benefits-of-trait-bounds)
  - [Resources](#resources)

## Traits: Defining Shared Behavior

In Rust, a **trait** is a way to describe shared behavior among different data types. It is similar to the concept of an *interface* in other programming languages, although Rust traits have unique features that make them more flexible in certain situations. A trait lets us specify a set of methods that a type must implement. If a type implements that trait, we can call those methods on instances of that type.

When we work with generic code, traits become especially powerful. They allow us to write functions and structures that can handle many types, while also ensuring that these types support the behavior we need. This approach helps the Rust compiler catch errors at compile time, giving us more robust programs.

### The Purpose of Traits

A trait describes a set of methods that a type must provide. When we declare a trait, we list the signatures of these methods. Any type that implements the trait must then supply the actual method bodies for those signatures.

For instance, imagine we want multiple data structures (like a `NewsArticle` and a `Tweet`) to each provide a `summarize` method. We can do this by defining a `Summary` trait with a `summarize` method signature.

```rust
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String;
}
```

This code defines a `Summary` trait with a single method, `summarize`, that returns a `String`. Any type implementing the `Summary` trait must provide its own `summarize` method. Within the curly brackets, each line is a method signature ending with a semicolon. No method body is defined here, which means that any type implementing Summary needs to provide its own version of summarize. In Rust, we can have multiple methods in one trait, and each must either be given a default implementation (discussed later) or left as a signature for the implementor to fill in.

### Implementing a Trait on a Type

Once a trait is defined, we can implement it for any type in our crate. Suppose we have two structures: one named `NewsArticle` and one named `Tweet`. We want both to return a textual summary, but they each store different kinds of data. We can implement the `Summary` trait on each of them. For `NewsArticle`, we might create a summary based on its headline and author. For `Tweet`, we might produce a string that includes the username and content of the tweet.

An example implementation looks like this:

```rust
impl Summary for NewsArticle {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        format!("{}, by {} ({})", self.headline, self.author, self.location)
    }
}

impl Summary for Tweet {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        format!("{}: {}", self.username, self.content)
    }
}
```

In these blocks, we specify `impl Summary for ...` and provide the actual method body of summarize. The compiler enforces that this method matches the signature given by the trait. Once implemented, we can call `some_tweet.summarize()` or `some_article.summarize()` and get a custom summary string for each type.

```rust
use aggregator::{Summary, NewsArticle, Tweet};

fn main() {
    let tweet = Tweet {
        username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
        content: String::from("of course, as you probably already know, people"),
        reply: false,
        retweet: false,
    };

    println!("1 new tweet: {}", tweet.summarize());
    /*
    1 new tweet: horse_ebooks: of course, as you probably already know, people
    */

    let article = NewsArticle {
        headline: String::from("Penguins win the Stanley Cup Championship!"),
        location: String::from("Pittsburgh, PA, USA"),
        author: String::from("Iceburgh"),
        content: String::from("The Pittsburgh Penguins once again are the best hockey team in the NHL."),
    };

    println!("New article available! {}", article.summarize());
    /*
    New article available! Penguins win the Stanley Cup Championship!, by Iceburgh (Pittsburgh, PA, USA)
    */
}
```

### Restrictions on Implementing Traits

Other crates depending on `aggregator` can use the `Summary` trait and its methods, by bringing it into scope with `use aggregator::Summary;`. However, there is a restriction on implementing traits: we can implement a trait on a type only if either the trait or the type is local to our crate. This restriction is part of a property of programs called *coherence*, which ensures that the compiler can reason about all the possible implementations of a trait. If the trait and the type were defined in a different crate, other people could implement the trait on the type, and Rust wouldn't be able to guarantee the behavior of the code. This restriction is called the *orphan rule*.

For example:

- we **can't** implement `Display` on `Vec<T>` because `Display` and `Vec<T>` are defined in the standard library and aren't local to our crate.
- we **can** implement `Summary` on `Vec<T>` because `Summary` is local to our crate.

## Default Implementations

A trait can offer a default implementation for any method. This default code can be used unless a type implementing the trait decides to override that method. If the default method calls other trait methods, the implementing type only needs to supply the parts that vary.

For example, imagine that `Summary` has a default summarize method that just returns the string `(Read more...)`:

```rust
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        String::from("(Read more...)")
    }
}
```

We can implement `Summary` for a type by writing an empty `impl` block if the default logic suffices:

```rust
impl Summary for NewsArticle {}
```

Now, calling `summarize()` on a `NewsArticle` value uses the default string `(Read more...)`. Alternatively, if we want a type to produce a custom summary, we override the method by writing a new body for `fn summarize(&self) -> String`.

It is also possible for a default method to call another required method in the same trait. In this scenario, each type must only implement the required method, while the default method can reuse the type’s custom logic. This technique lets you define significant behavior in a trait without forcing all implementors to rewrite the same code.

```rust
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarize_author(&self) -> String;

    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        format!("(Read more from {}...)", self.summarize_author())
    }
}
```

In this example, `summarize` calls `summarize_author` to get the author’s name. Any type implementing `Summary` must provide a `summarize_author` method, but they can use the default `summarize` method to get the author’s name in the summary.

Note that it isn’t possible to call the default implementation from an overriding implementation of that same method. This restriction ensures that the trait remains a consistent interface for all implementors.

```rust
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        String::from("(Read more...)")
    }
}

impl Summary for NewsArticle {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        format!("{}, by {} ({})", self.headline, self.author, self.location)
    }
}
```

In this example, the `summarize` method for `NewsArticle` overrides the default implementation. The default implementation is still available for other types implementing `Summary`.

## Traits as Parameters

Sometimes we have a function that needs to accept any type that implements a certain trait. We can write a function parameter as `&impl Summary` to say that the function requires an argument that implements the `Summary` trait. Here is a quick example:

```rust
pub fn notify(item: &impl Summary) {
    println!("Breaking news! {}", item.summarize());
}
```

This function can be given either a `Tweet` or a `NewsArticle` object (or anything else that implements `Summary`) to print a notification. The Rust compiler checks at compile time that the type passed in truly implements `Summary`. If we had attempted to pass in a type that does not, the code would fail to compile.

### Trait Bound Syntax

If we need the function to require multiple parameters of the same type, we can use a more explicit “trait bound” syntax, for example:

```rust
pub fn notify<T: Summary>(item1: &T, item2: &T) {
    // ...
}
```

This syntax is particularly useful when we need to accept multiple parameters of the same type, or when we need to refer to the type that implements the trait in the function body. However, it can be also used with a single parameter, as in the previous example.

### Multiple Trait Bounds

We can also specify multiple trait bounds on a generic type by using the `+` syntax. For example, if we have a function that requires two different traits, we can write:

```rust
pub fn notify(item: &(impl Summary + Display)) {
    // ...
}
```

This syntax can be used also for generic types:

```rust
pub fn notify<T: Summary + Display>(item: &T) {
    // ...
}
```

### `where` clause

When we have many trait bounds, the function signature can become hard to read. In these cases, we can use a `where` clause to separate the trait bounds from the function signature. Writing the function signature without a `where` clause can lead to a long and hard-to-read line. For example:

```rust
fn some_function<T: Display + Clone, U: Clone + Debug>(t: &T, u: &U) -> i32 {
    // ...
}
```

The same function with a `where` clause:

```rust
fn some_function<T, U>(t: &T, u: &U) -> i32
    where T: Display + Clone,
          U: Clone + Debug
{
    // ...
}
```

## Returning Types that Implement Traits

We can also use traits as return types. For example, we can write a function that returns a type implementing `Summary`:

```rust
fn returns_summarizable() -> impl Summary {
    Tweet {
        username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
        content: String::from("of course, as you probably already know, people"),
        reply: false,
        retweet: false,
    }
}
```

Note that we can use `impl Summary` only when the function returns a single type. Indeed, the following code will not compile:

```rust
fn returns_summarizable(switch: bool) -> impl Summary {
    if switch {
        NewsArticle {
            headline: String::from("Penguins win the Stanley Cup Championship!"),
            location: String::from("Pittsburgh, PA, USA"),
            ...
        }
    } else {
        Tweet {
            username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
            content: String::from("of course, as you probably already know, people"),
            ...
        }
    }
}
```

## Using Trait Bounds to Conditionally Implement Methods

In Rust, **trait bounds** can determine which methods are available on a generic type based on what traits that type implements. By declaring constraints in an `impl` block, we can require that a type satisfy certain traits before giving it specific functionality. A classic example is the `Pair<T>` structure, which always has a `new` method but only provides a comparison-related method, `cmp_display`, if `T` implements both `Display` and `PartialOrd`.

Consider the following structure:

```rust
struct Pair<T> {
    x: T,
    y: T,
}

impl<T> Pair<T> {
    fn new(x: T, y: T) -> Self {
        Self { x, y }
    }
}
```

Every `Pair<T>` can call new to construct an instance of itself. However, if we add a second `impl` block like this:

```rust
use std::fmt::Display;

impl<T: Display + PartialOrd> Pair<T> {
    fn cmp_display(&self) {
        if self.x >= self.y {
            println!("The largest member is x = {}", self.x);
        } else {
            println!("The largest member is y = {}", self.y);
        }
    }
}
```

then `cmp_display` is only available for `Pair<T>` where `T` implements both `Display` and `PartialOrd`. In other words, you can only compare and print the two fields if the type is both comparable (`PartialOrd`) and printable (`Display`).

### Blanket Implementations

Rust’s standard library frequently uses blanket implementations to give many types a certain trait automatically, as long as they meet a requirement. For example, the library provides this pattern for `ToString`:

```rust
impl<T: Display> ToString for T {
    // ...
}
```

This means any type `T` that implements `Display` automatically gains the `to_string` method. For instance, because `i32` implements Display, you can call `let s = 3.to_string();`. These blanket implementations reduce boilerplate and let Rust code seamlessly handle a wide range of types.

### Benefits of Trait Bounds

By specifying traits as requirements for a generic type, Rust can verify at compile time that all operations are valid for the types in use. This approach prevents runtime errors in cases where a type might not support a method. Instead, Rust enforces correctness upfront, ensuring better performance and more reliable programs. We still retain flexibility through generics—types that meet the traits can differ in other ways—but now the compiler guarantees they all provide the behaviors we rely on.

## Resources

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 10.2: [Using Trait Objects That Allow for Values of Different Types](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch17-02-trait-objects.html)