# Day 2 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 2 - Rust Roadmap](#day-2---rust-roadmap)
  - [Mutability](#mutability)
  - [Constants](#constants)
  - [Shadowing](#shadowing)
  - [Data types](#data-types)
    - [Scalar types](#scalar-types)
      - [Integers](#integers)
    - [Floating-point numbers](#floating-point-numbers)
  - [Boolean](#boolean)
  - [Characters](#characters)
  - [Compound types](#compound-types)
    - [Tuple](#tuple)
    - [arrays](#arrays)
      - [Invalid array access](#invalid-array-access)
  - [Overflow](#overflow)
    - [wrapping](#wrapping)
    - [Checked](#checked)
    - [Saturation](#saturation)
    - [Overflowing](#overflowing)
  - [Resources](#resources)
  - [Key concepts](#key-concepts)

## Mutability

In Rust, variables are **immutable** by default. Declaring a variable using `let x = 5;` ensures that the variable `x` will not change its value. If you try to reassign `x`, the compiler will throw an error.

```error
cannot assign twice to immutable variable
```

To make a variable **mutable**, you can use the `mut` keyword: `let mut x = 5;`. This allows you to change the value of `x` later in the code.

```rust
let mut x = 5;
x = 10;
```

## Constants

Rust also has **constants**, which are always immutable. You can declare a constant using the `const` keyword:

```rust
const MAX_POINTS: u32 = 100_000;
```

A constant's value must be known at compile time, so we can use constant expressions, and its type must be annotated. Constants are a good choice for values that should not change during the program's execution, and for them which should have global scope.

```rust
const SECONDS_IN_DAY: u8 = 24 * 60 * 60; // 86400
```

Naming convention for constants is to use uppercase snake case, with underscores separating words.

## Shadowing

Rust allows you to **shadow** a variable by declaring a new variable with the same name as an existing variable. This is useful when you want to change the type of a variable or reuse the variable name.

```rust
let x = 5;
let x = x + 1;

println!("The value of x is: {x}"); // 6
```

It's also possible to shadow a variable whithin a block scope:

```rust
let x = 5;

{
    let x = 10;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}"); // 10
}

println!("The value of x is: {x}"); // 5
```

Shadowing is different from mutability. When you shadow a variable, you can change its type, but you can't mutate the original variable. This is useful when you want to reuse the variable name for a different purpose.

```rust
let input = "42";            // original binding
let input = input.trim();    // new binding (shadowed) -> &str
let input = input.parse::<u32>().unwrap(); // new binding -> u32
```

If instead of shadowing we declared the new variable as mutable, we cannot change its type:

```rust
let mut input = "42";            // original binding
input = input.trim();            // error: mismatched types
```

## Data types

Rust is a statically typed language, which means that the compiler must know the types of all variables at compile time; however, compiler is often able to infer the type based on the value and how it's used by looking at the value itself or the functions that are used on it.

To specify the type of a variable we can use the `let x: <type> = ...;` syntax:

```rust
let x: i32 = 5;
let name:&str = "Alice";
```

### Scalar types

Rust has four primary scalar types: integers, floating-point numbers, booleans, and characters.

#### Integers

Integers are whole numbers without a fractional component. Rust has signed and unsigned integers, which can be of different sizes. The signed integers are represented using two's complement notation.

In the following table, you can see the different integer types available in Rust:

| Length  | Signed | Unsigned |
|---------|--------|----------|
| 8-bit   | i8     | u8       |
| 16-bit  | i16    | u16      |
| 32-bit  | i32    | u32      |
| 64-bit  | i64    | u64      |
| 128-bit | i128   | u128     |
| arch    | isize  | usize    |

The `isize` and `usize` types depend on the architecture of the system. On a 64-bit system, they are 64 bits long; on a 32-bit system, they are 32 bits long. Default integer type is `i32`. Rust implements various checks on integer operations to prevent overflows, which can lead to unexpected behavior, which will be briefly discussed in [this section](#overflow).

Assignement of integer literals can be done in different bases:

```rust
let decimal = 98_222;
let hex = 0xff;
let octal = 0o77;
let binary = 0b1111_0000;
let byte = b'A'; // only  u8
```

### Floating-point numbers

Two types of floating-point numbers are available in Rust: `f32` and `f64`. The default type is `f64` because it is generally more precise than `f32`. Rust uses the IEEE-754 standard to represent floating-point numbers.

```rust
let x = 2.0; // f64
let y: f32 = 3.0; // f32
```

## Boolean 

The `bool` type in Rust represents a boolean value, which can be either `true` or `false`. Booleans are used in conditional expressions and control flow statements.

```rust
let is_raining = true;
let is_sunny: bool = false;
```

## Characters

In Rust, the `char` type represents a single Unicode character. Characters are **enclosed in single quotes**, and they are four bytes in size. Rust's `char` type is more than just ASCII, it can represent any Unicode character, which means you can use emojis, Chinese characters, and other symbols.

```rust
let c = 'z';
let heart_emoji = '❤';
let japanese_char = '日';
```

## Compound types

Rust has two compound types: tuples and arrays. In simple terms, compound types can group multiple values into one type.

### Tuple

A tuple is a collection of values of different types. Tuples have a fixed length, and once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size. To create a tuple, you can use parentheses `()` and separate the values with commas.

```rust
let person: (&str, i32) = ("Alice", 30);
```

You can access the elements of a tuple using pattern matching or the `.` operator followed by the index.

```rust
let ('Alice', 30) = person;
println!("{} is {} years old", name, age);

let name = person.0;
let age = person.1;
println!("{} is {} years old", name, age);
```

### arrays

Arrays are collections of values of the same type. Arrays have a fixed length, and once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size. To create an array, you can use square brackets `[]` and separate the values with commas.

```rust
let numbers: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]; // array of 5 elements of type i32
let names = ["Alice", "Bob", "Charlie"]; // array of 3 elements of type &str
let numbers = [0; 5]; // array of 5 elements with initial value 0
```

#### Invalid array access

If you try to access an element outside the array bounds, Rust will throw a runtime error.

```rust
let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let index = 10;
let element = numbers[index]; // error: index out of bounds
```

The error is similar to the following:

```error
thread 'main' panicked at src/main.rs:19:19:
index out of bounds: the len is 5 but the index is 10
note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace
```

This is an example of Rust's safety features. The compiler checks for invalid array accesses at runtime and prevents undefined behavior.

## Overflow

If we try to assign a value to an integer that is larger than the maximum value that the integer type can hold, a **Integer Overflow** will occur. When in debug mode, Rust will panic and stop the program.
If instead we compile with `--release`, RUst does not include the checks for overflow, and the program will wrap around the value e.g. `u8`'s 256 will become 0, 257 will become 1, and so on. In this way the program will not panic, but the result will probably be incorrect.

To handle overflow, Rust provides the **wrapping** methods, provided by the standard library.

### wrapping

Warpping methods, such as `wrapping_add`, `wrapping_sub`, `wrapping_mul`, etc., will perform the operation and wrap around the value in case of overflow.

### Checked

The `checked_add`, `checked_sub`, `checked_mul`, etc., will return an `Option` type, which will be `Some(result)` if the operation did not overflow, and `None` otherwise.

```rust
let x: u8 = 255;
match x.checked_add(1) {
    Some(v) => println!("Result: {v}"),       //Result is a legal value
    None    => println!("Overflow detected!"),  //Overflow detected
}
```

### Saturation

Saturating methods, such as `saturating_add`, `saturating_sub`, `saturating_mul`, etc., will return the maximum or minimum value of the type in case of overflow.

```rust
let x: u8 = 255;
let result = x.saturating_add(1); // 255

let y: u8 = 10;
let result = y.saturating_add(1); // 11
```

### Overflowing

The `overflowing_add`, `overflowing_sub`, `overflowing_mul`, etc., will return a tuple with the result of the operation and a boolean indicating if the operation overflowed.

```rust
let x: u8 = 255;
let (result, overflow):(u8, bool) = x.overflowing_add(1); // (0, true)

let y: u8 = 10;
let (result, overflow) = y.overflowing_add(1); // (11, false)
```

## Resources

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 3.1: Variables and Mutability
- 3.2: Data Types

## Key concepts

- Variables are immutable by default
- Constants are always immutable
- Shadowing allows you to reuse a variable name
- Rust is a statically typed language
- Rust has scalar and compound data types
- Rust has specific methods to handle integer overflow
