# Day 22 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 22 - Rust Roadmap](#day-22---rust-roadmap)
  - [HashMap](#hashmap)
    - [Accessing Values in a HashMap](#accessing-values-in-a-hashmap)
    - [Overwriting a Value](#overwriting-a-value)
    - [Hashing Functions](#hashing-functions)
  - [Resources](#resources)
  - [Exercises](#exercises)
    - [Unique number of occurrences](#unique-number-of-occurrences)
    - [Equal Row and Column Pairs](#equal-row-and-column-pairs)

## HashMap

A `HashMap` is a data structure that stores key-value pairs. It is implemented using a hash table, which allows us to insert, remove, and search for values in constant time. To create a new `HashMap`, we can use the `HashMap` type from the `std::collections` module:

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);
```

In this example, we create a new `HashMap` called `scores` that maps `String` keys to `i32` values. We insert two key-value pairs into the `HashMap` using the `insert` method. A property of `HashMap` is that the keys and values can have different types, but all keys must have the same type, and all values must have the same type.

### Accessing Values in a HashMap

To access a value in a `HashMap`, we can use the `get` method, which returns an `Option<&V>`:

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);

let score = scores.get("Blue");

match score {
    Some(value) => println!("The score for Blue is {}", value),
    None => println!("No score for Blue"),
}
```

The `get` method returns an `Option<&V>`, where `V` is the type of the values stored in the `HashMap`. If the key is found in the `HashMap`, `get` returns `Some(&value)`, where `value` is a reference to the value associated with the key. If the key is not found, `get` returns `None`.

We can also use the `entry` method to insert a value if the key does not exist:

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);

scores.entry(String::from("Red")).or_insert(25);
```

In this example, we use the `entry` method to insert a key-value pair into the `HashMap` if the key `"Red"` does not exist. The `or_insert` method is called on the return value of `entry`, and it inserts the specified value (in this case, `25`) if the key does not exist.

We can also update a value in a `HashMap` using the `insert` method:

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 25);
```

In this example, we update the value associated with the key `"Blue"` in the `HashMap` by calling `insert` with the same key and a new value. The new value replaces the old value associated with the key.

To update a value based on the old value, we can use the `entry` method:

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);

let score = scores.entry(String::from("Blue")).or_insert(0);
*score += 10;
```

The previous example updates the value associated with the key `"Blue"` by adding `10` to the existing value. The `entry` method returns a mutable reference to the value associated with the key, which we can modify using the dereference operator `*`.

### Overwriting a Value

When we insert a key-value pair into a `HashMap` that already contains the key, the new value will overwrite the old value:

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 25);

let score = scores.get("Blue"); // Returns Some(25)
```

In this example, we insert the key-value pair `"Blue": 10"` into the `HashMap`, and then we insert the key-value pair `"Blue": 25"`. The second insertion overwrites the old value, so the value associated with the key `"Blue"` is `25`.

If we want to insert a value only if the key does not exist, we can use the `entry` method:

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);

scores.entry(String::from("Blue")).or_insert(25);
```

### Hashing Functions

By default, `HashMap` uses the *SipHash* algorithm, which isn't the fastest hashing algorithm but provides good security against DoS attacks. We can use a different hashing algorithm by implementing the `Hash` trait for the key type. The `Hash` trait requires the `std::hash::Hash` and `std::hash::Hasher` traits to be implemented.

## Resources

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 8.3: Storing Keys with Associated Values in Hash Maps

## Exercises

### Unique number of occurrences

Given an array of integers arr, return true if the number of occurrences of each value in the array is unique or false otherwise.

Link to LeetCode: [Unique number of occurrences](https://leetcode.com/problems/unique-number-of-occurrences/)

### Equal Row and Column Pairs

Given a 0-indexed n x n integer matrix grid, return the number of pairs (ri, cj) such that row ri and column cj are equal.

A row and column pair is considered equal if they contain the same elements in the same order (i.e., an equal array).

Link to LeetCode: [Equal Row and Column Pairs](https://leetcode.com/problems/equal-row-and-column-pairs/description)
