# Day 24 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 24 - Rust Roadmap](#day-24---rust-roadmap)
  - [Iterators](#iterators)
    - [The `Iterator` Trait](#the-iterator-trait)
      - [Various Iterators](#various-iterators)
    - [Consuming Iterators](#consuming-iterators)
    - [Producing Iterators](#producing-iterators)
  - [Comparing performance: Loops vs Iterators](#comparing-performance-loops-vs-iterators)
  - [Some useful Iterator methods](#some-useful-iterator-methods)
    - [`filter`](#filter)
    - [`map`](#map)
    - [`zip`](#zip)
    - [`enumerate`](#enumerate)
    - [Other methods](#other-methods)
  - [References](#references)

## Iterators

In Rust, iterators are a powerful and flexible way to work with sequences of data. They allow you to traverse collections, such as arrays, vectors, and hash maps, without needing to manage the underlying data structure directly. Iterators in Rust are **lazy**, meaning they do not perform any computation until they are consumed.

```rust
let numbers = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let iter = numbers.iter();

for number in iter {
    println!("{}", number);
}
```

### The `Iterator` Trait

All iterators in Rust implement the `Iterator` trait, which defines a set of methods that can be used to manipulate and consume the iterator. The most important method in the `Iterator` trait is `next`, which returns the next item in the sequence.

```rust
pub trait Iterator {
    type Item;

    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Self::Item>;

    // methods with default implementations elided
}
```

The usage for `next` is pretty straightforward:

```rust
    #[test]
    fn iterator_demonstration() {
        let v1 = vec![1, 2, 3];

        let mut v1_iter = v1.iter();

        assert_eq!(v1_iter.next(), Some(&1));
        assert_eq!(v1_iter.next(), Some(&2));
        assert_eq!(v1_iter.next(), Some(&3));
        assert_eq!(v1_iter.next(), None);
    }
```

The `next` method returns an `Option` type, which can be either `Some(item)` if there is an item available or `None` if the iterator has been exhausted.

The `mut` keyword is used to indicate that the iterator is mutable, allowing it to change its internal state as it iterates through the collection. This is important because the iterator needs to keep track of which item it is currently on: omitting `mut` would result in a compilation error.

#### Various Iterators

In the previous example, we used the `iter` method to create an iterator over a vector, whose references are immutable. However, there are other methods available to create different types of iterators:

- `iter_mut`: Creates a mutable iterator that allows you to modify the elements of the collection.
- `into_iter`: Consumes the collection and creates an iterator that takes ownership of the elements, allowing you to move them out of the collection.

### Consuming Iterators

The `Iterator` trait provides several methods that allow you to consume the iterator and perform operations on the items it produces.

```rust
#[test]
fn iterator_sum() {
    let v1 = vec![1, 2, 3];

    let v1_iter = v1.iter();
    let total: i32 = v1_iter.sum();

    assert_eq!(total, 6);
    }
```

Their underlying implementation is based on the `next` method, which results in a chain of calls to `next` until the iterator is exhausted: we're not allowed to use the iterator after it has been consumed, and this is valid both after using `next` on last element and after using any of the consuming methods. These methods are called **consuming adapters** because they consume the iterator and produce a final result.

### Producing Iterators

**Iterator adapters** are methods that produce a new iterator from an existing one. They **do not consume the original iterator** but instead create a new one that can be used to perform additional operations on the items produced by the original iterator, allowing for a more functional programming style by using closures, introduced in the previous chapter.

```rust
let v1 = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

v1.iter().map(|x| x + 1);
```

The `map` method is an example of an iterator adapter. It takes a closure as an argument and applies it to each item produced by the original iterator, producing a new iterator with the results. However, this code will produce a warning because the iterator is not consumed, thus it is not even created. To consume the iterator, we can use a consuming method like `collect` or `for_each`:

```rust
    let v1: Vec<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3];

    let v2: Vec<_> = v1.iter().map(|x| x + 1).collect();

    assert_eq!(v2, vec![2, 3, 4]);
```

It is also possible to chain multiple iterator adapters together to create complex transformations on the data:

```rust
let v1 = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let v2: Vec<_> = v1.iter()
    .filter(|&&x| x % 2 == 0)
    .map(|&x| x * 2)
    .collect();
assert_eq!(v2, vec![4, 8]);
```

The `filter` method is another example of an iterator adapter. It takes a closure that returns a boolean value and produces a new iterator that only includes the items for which the closure returns `true`. In this case, we filter out the odd numbers and then double the even ones. These numbers are then collected into a new vector, `v2`, and then doubled by the `map` method.

## Comparing performance: Loops vs Iterators

In Rust, the performance of loops and iterators is very similar. Benchmarks comparing a `for` loop and an iterator-based approach for searching within a large string showed comparable execution times.

This similarity in performance is due to Rust's **zero-cost abstraction** principle: this means that using high-level abstractions like iterators does not introduce any significant runtime overhead compared to writing lower-level code directly. In essence, w**hat you use, you don't pay for, and what you do use, you couldn't hand code any better**.

For instance, the iterator methods, although appearing to be higher-level, are often compiled down to roughly the same machine code as their explicit loop counterparts. In some cases, Rust's compiler can even perform optimizations like loop unrolling on iterator chains, resulting in highly efficient code.

Therefore, we can generally prefer the iterator style in Rust for its clarity and conciseness without worrying about a performance penalty. Iterators allow us to focus on the high-level logic rather than the low-level details of looping.

## Some useful Iterator methods

### `filter`

The `filter` method is an iterator adapter that allows you to filter elements based on a predicate. It takes a closure that returns a boolean value and produces a new iterator that only includes the items for which the closure returns `true`.

```rust
let numbers = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let even_numbers: Vec<_> = numbers.iter()
    .filter(|&&x| x % 2 == 0)
    .collect();
assert_eq!(even_numbers, vec![2, 4]);
```

It is usually used to extract a subset of elements from a collection based on some condition. In this example, we filter out the even numbers from the original vector and collect them into a new vector.

### `map`

The `map` method is another iterator adapter that allows you to transform elements of an iterator. It takes a closure that defines how to transform each item and produces a new iterator with the transformed items.

```rust
let numbers = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let squared_numbers: Vec<_> = numbers.iter()
    .map(|&x| x * x)
    .collect();
assert_eq!(squared_numbers, vec![1, 4, 9, 16, 25]);
```

### `zip`

The `zip` method combines two iterators into a single iterator of pairs. It takes another iterator as an argument and produces an iterator that yields tuples containing elements from both iterators.

```rust
let numbers1 = vec![1, 2, 3];
let numbers2 = vec![4, 5, 6];

let zipped: Vec<_> = numbers1.iter()
    .zip(numbers2.iter())
    .collect();
assert_eq!(zipped, vec![(&1, &4), (&2, &5), (&3, &6)]);
```

Another usage is to combine two iterators of different lengths, even infinite iterators, into a single iterator of pairs. The `zip` method will stop producing pairs when the shorter iterator is exhausted.

### `enumerate`

The `enumerate` method is an iterator adapter that adds an index to each item produced by the iterator. It produces an iterator of tuples, where each tuple contains the index and the item.

```rust
let numbers = vec![10, 20, 30];
let enumerated: Vec<_> = numbers.iter()
    .enumerate()
    .collect();
assert_eq!(enumerated, vec![(0, &10), (1, &20), (2, &30)]);
```

### Other methods

Other useful iterator methods can be found in the [Rust documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html).

## References

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 13.2: Processing a series of items with `Iterator`
- 13.4: Comparing performance: Loops vs Iterators
