# Day 6 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 6 - Rust Roadmap](#day-6---rust-roadmap)
  - [Recap: stack, heap and scope](#recap-stack-heap-and-scope)
    - [Stack](#stack)
    - [Heap](#heap)
    - [Ownership](#ownership)
    - [Scope](#scope)
  - [`String` type](#string-type)
  - [Memory allocation](#memory-allocation)
  - [Interactions between data and variables](#interactions-between-data-and-variables)
  - [Scope and assignment](#scope-and-assignment)
    - [`clone()` and `Copy` trait](#clone-and-copy-trait)
    - [`Copy` vs `Drop`](#copy-vs-drop)
  - [Ownership and functions](#ownership-and-functions)
  - [Return values and scope](#return-values-and-scope)
  - [Resources](#resources)
  - [Exercises](#exercises)

---

## Recap: stack, heap and scope

### Stack

The stack is a region of memory that follows the LIFO (Last In, First Out) model. It is used to store data that is known at compile time or **data that is not going to change size**. The stack is fast because it never has to search for a place to put new data; it just moves the stack pointer up or down. Putting data on the stack is called **pushing**, and removing data from the stack is called **popping**.

### Heap

The heap is less organized than the stack. When you put data on the heap, you request a certain amount of space. The operating system finds an empty spot in the heap that is big enough, marks it as being in use, and returns a pointer, which is the address of that location. This process is called **allocating on the heap** and is sometimes abbreviated as just **allocating**. Pushing data onto the heap is not as fast as pushing data onto the stack because the heap is less organized; you must search for an empty spot to place the data, and even retrieving data is slower because you have to follow a pointer to get there. Removing data from the heap is called **deallocating**; this is where you tell the operating system that you are done with the data on the heap and it can now be used for something else.

### Ownership

All the problems about heap management, such as tracking what parts of code are using what data on the heap, minimizing the amount of duplicate data on the heap, and cleaning up unused data on the heap so you don’t run out of space, are addressed by Rust’s ownership system. Rust’s ownership system is a set of rules that the compiler checks at compile time. Most of the time, these rules are straightforward to follow once you’ve adapted to them; however, knowing these concepts will help you understand why Rust behaves the way it does.

### Scope

We've already meet the concept of **scope** when we talked about *variable shadowing*. In general, the scope is the range within a program for which an item is valid. For example in the following code:

```rust
// here `x` is not valid
{
    let x = 5;
    // here `x` is valid
} // here `x` is not valid
```

The variable `x` is only valid within the curly braces. This is important because it helps to avoid bugs and makes the code easier to understand. The Rust compiler will enforce this rule at compile time.

## `String` type

The `String` type is complex, because a variable of this type has not a fixed size. This means that the data cannot be stored on the stack. Indeed, data of type `String` is **stored on the heap**. Literals, instead, are stored on the stack because their size is known at compile time, thus they cannot be modified, because size of data on the stack cannot change. However, we can *modify* a literal by creating a `String` from it.

```rust
let mut s = String::from("hello");
s.push_str(", world!");
println!("{}", s); // prints "hello, world!"
```

In this example, `s` is a `String`. When we call `push_str` on `s`, we are modifying the `String` in place. This is possible because the `String` type is stored on the heap, and the size of the data it points to can change. This is not the case for literals, which are stored on the stack.

## Memory allocation

Given the limitation on the fixed and know-at-compile-time size for literals, they cannot handle the need for a **mutable** and **mutable** text-based variable, so `Strings` has been introduced, with the following needs:

- the memory must be requested from the memory allocator at runtime;
- the memory must be returned to the memory allocator when we’re done with our `String`.

While the first is done by programmers by using `String::from`, the second is done by Rust automatically. Storically, there were two main approaches to memory management:

- **Garbage collection**: the garbage collector keeps track of what memory is being used and what is not, cleaning up memory that is no longer being used;
- **Manual memory management**: the programmer must explicitly allocate and deallocate memory (e.g., in `C` with `malloc` and `free`)

Rust uses a third approach: **ownership**. This means that the memory is automatically returned once the variable goes out of scope. This is done by the `drop` function, which is called automatically when a variable goes out of scope. This is a very powerful feature, because it allows to avoid memory leaks and double frees, which are common problems in manual memory management. We can visualize this concept looking at one of the previous code snippet:

```rust
{
    let s = String::from("hello");
    // `s` is valid
} // `drop()` function inserted by Rust is called here
```

When `s` goes out of scope, Rust calls the `drop` function, which returns the memory to the memory allocator. This is done automatically, and the programmer does not have to worry about it.

## Interactions between data and variables

In Rust, different variables can interact with the same data, and these interactions can be different based on data type. Looking at the following code:

```rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;
```

As we can image, the behavior is something similar to:

1. bind the value `5` to `x`;
2. make a copy of the value assigned to `x`;
3. bind the copied value to `y`.

And this is true because `i32` has a known, fixed length. However, this is not the case for `String`:

```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1;
```

The behavior is different, first of all because the `String` type has a special implementation of their variables. We can indeed describe a `String` as a tuple of three elements:

- a pointer to the memory on the heap;
- the length of the string;
- the capacity of the string.

When we assign `s1` to `s2`, we are copying the pointer, the length and the capacity, but not the data on the heap. What happens when both those variables go out of scope?

```rust
{
    let s1 = String::from("hello");
    let s2 = s1;
}   // drop for both `s1` and `s2` is called here
```

Without any special handling, Rust would try to free the same memory twice, which is a problem for security and performance. To avoid this, Rust uses a concept called **move**. When we assign `s1` to `s2`, Rust considers `s1` as no longer valid, and we cannot use it anymore. Let's see an example of this:

```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1;

println!("{}, world!", s1); // error: value borrowed here after move
```

We can see the **move** operation as an *evolution* of a **shallow copy**: Rust doesn't copy the data on the heap, but it copies the pointer, the length and the capacity, as a shallow copy would do. However, Rust also invalidates the source variable, so we cannot use it anymore. Also note that Rust will never automatically create a deep copy of data on the heap, because it would be too expensive in terms of performance.

## Scope and assignment

Dealing with `mut` variables, we can see that the scope of a variable is not affected by the `mut` keyword. The following code is perfectly valid:

```rust
let mut s = String::from("hello");
s = String::from("ciao");

println!("{} world!", s); // prints "ciao world!"
```

The workflow under the hood is the following:

1. `s` is declared with the tuple of pointer, length and capacity pointing to the memory on the heap with the string `"hello"`;
2. a new tuple is created with the pointer, length and capacity pointing to the memory on the heap with the string `"ciao"`;
3. the tuple of `s` is updated with the tuple of the new string `"ciao"`;

At this point, the previous memory on the heap for the string `"hello"` goes out of scope, and then Rust calls the `drop` function to free the memory immediately. This is a very powerful feature, because it allows to avoid memory leaks and double frees, which are common problems in manual memory management. This is done automatically, and the programmer does not have to worry about it.

### `clone()` and `Copy` trait

If we want to create a deep copy of a `String`, we can use the `clone` method. This method will create a new tuple with the pointer, length and capacity pointing to a new memory on the heap, and the data will be copied from the source memory to the destination memory. This is a very expensive operation, so it should be used only when necessary.

```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1.clone();
println!("s1 = {}, s2 = {}", s1, s2); // prints "s1 = hello, s2 = hello"
```

But do we need to call `clone` method when we are dealing with other types? It actually depends on the type and if the type implements the `Copy` trait. It is applied to types whose length is known at compile time, thus for those types which do not implement the `Drop` trait (meaning that they do not need to free memory when they go out of scope, as we saw in [Memory allocation](#memory-allocation) through the `drop` function). Types with `Copy` trait can be copied by simply assigning them to another variable, without invalidating the source variable. An example of this is the `i32` type:

```rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;
println!("x = {}, y = {}", x, y); // prints "x = 5, y = 5"
```

Given that `i32` implements the `Copy` trait, the behavior is the same as a call to `clone` method, without invalidating the source variable. Other types that implement the `Copy` trait are:

- all the types whose length is known at compile time (e.g., all the integer, floating point, boolean, character types);
- tuples, if all the elements implement the `Copy` trait (e.g., `(i32, bool)` implements the `Copy` trait, but `(i32, String)` does not).

### `Copy` vs `Drop`

The `Copy` and `Drop` traits are mutually exclusive: a type can implement one of them, but not both. If we try to declare a `Drop`-based type as a `Copy` one, the compiler will throw an error. In conclusion:

- `Copy` types are copied *more easily* than `Drop` types, and both the source and the destination variables are valid;
- `Drop` types use the **move** operation, and the source variable is invalidated.

For more information about traits, see the [official documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html). However, these topics will be covered in the next days.

## Ownership and functions

Passing a variable to a function is similar to assigning it to another variable, so the same rules, depending on their traits, apply. Let's see an example:

```rust
fn main() {
    let s = String::from("hello");
    takes_ownership(s);

    let x = 5;
    makes_copy(x);

    println!("{}", x); // prints "5"
    // println!("{}", s); // error: value borrowed here after move
}

fn takes_ownership(some_string: String) {
    println!("{}", some_string);
}

fn makes_copy(some_integer: i32) {
    println!("{}", some_integer);
}
```

In this example, `s` is passed to the `takes_ownership` function, which takes ownership of the variable. This means that the source variable is invalidated, and we cannot use it anymore. If we try to use it after the function call, the compiler will throw an error. On the other hand, `x` is passed to the `makes_copy` function, which makes a copy of the variable. This means that the source variable is still valid, and we can use it after the function call.

## Return values and scope

It is possible to change the ownership of a variable by returning it from a function. This is done by returning the variable from the function, and then assigning the return value to another variable. Let's see an example:

```rust
fn main() {
    let s1 = gives_ownership();
    let s2 = String::from("hello");
    let s3 = takes_and_gives_back(s2);

    println!("s1 = {}, s3 = {}", s1, s3); // prints "s1 = hello, s3 = hello"
}

fn gives_ownership() -> String {
    let s = String::from("hello");
    s
}

fn takes_and_gives_back(s: String) -> String {
    s
}
```

In this example, `s1` is assigned to the return value of the `gives_ownership` function, which takes ownership of the variable. This means that the source variable is invalidated, and we cannot use it anymore. On the other hand, `s2` is passed to the `takes_and_gives_back` function, which takes ownership of the variable, and then returns it. This means that the source variable is invalidated, and we cannot use it anymore. The return value is then assigned to `s3`, which takes ownership of the variable. This means that the source variable is invalidated, and we cannot use it anymore. The `drop` function is called for variables `s1` and `s3` at the end of the `main` function, while `s2` is invalidated at the end of the `takes_and_gives_back` function, so the `drop` function is called there.

However, it can be tedious to return a variable from a function, and then assign it to another variable. Rust provides a feature called **references**, which allows to pass a reference to a variable to a function, without transferring the ownership.

## Resources

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 4.1 - What is Ownership?

## Exercises

You should implement a function for each of the following exercises, and then calling them altogether in the `main` function. You must then take only one input from the user, to gain confidence with the ownership system.

The suggested exercises are:

1. [Easy] Write a function that takes a `String` and returns its length.
2. [Medium] Write a function that takes a `String` and returns the first word in it. The function should return a tuple with the first word and the rest of the string.
3. [Hard] Write a function that takes a `String` and returns a new `String` containing only the unique characters from the original string, preserving their order of first appearance.

A possible structure for your code could be the following:

```rust
use std::io;
fn main() {
  let s = // read input from the user

  println!("The length of the string is {}", length(s));

  //use the same input for the following exercises
  println!("The first word is {}", first_word(s).0);

  //use the same input again
  println!("The unique characters are {}", unique_chars(s));

}
```