# Day 28 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 28 - Rust Roadmap](#day-28---rust-roadmap)
  - [`Mutex<T>`](#mutext)
    - [`Mutex<T>` in Rust](#mutext-in-rust)
    - [Sharing a `Mutex<T>` between threads](#sharing-a-mutext-between-threads)
    - [Atomic operations](#atomic-operations)
    - [Similarities between `RefCell<T>`/`Rc<T>` and `Mutex<T>`/`Arc<T>`](#similarities-between-refcelltrct-and-mutextarct)
  - [References](#references)

## `Mutex<T>`

A mutex (mutual exclusion) is a synchronization primitive that allows only one thread to access a resource at a time. This is implemented by using a **lock** on that resource. When a thread wants to access the resource, it must first acquire the lock. If another thread already holds the lock, the requesting thread will block until the lock is released. Mutexes are useful for protecting shared data from concurrent access and ensuring data integrity.

### `Mutex<T>` in Rust

In Rust, the `std::sync::Mutex` type provides a way to create a mutex. Here's an example of how to use a mutex in Rust:

```rust
use std::sync::Mutex;

fn main() {
    let m = Mutex::new(5);

    {
        let mut num = m.lock().unwrap();
        *num = 6;
    }

    println!("m = {m:?}");
}
```

There are some points to note about this example:

- The `Mutex::new(5)` creates a new mutex that wraps the value `5`.
- The `lock()` method is called to acquire the lock on the mutex. This method returns a `MutexGuard`, which is a smart pointer that automatically releases the lock when it goes out of scope.
- the `unwrap()` method is necessary to handle the potential error that can occur when trying to acquire the lock. Indeed, if the mutex is already locked by another thread, and that thread panics, the lock will be poisoned. In this case, the `lock()` method will return an error, and you need to handle it appropriately.
- The `*num = 6` line modifies the value inside the mutex. The `MutexGuard` dereferences to the underlying value, allowing you to modify it directly.
- The lock is automatically released when the `MutexGuard` goes out of scope, which happens at the end of the inner block.

### Sharing a `Mutex<T>` between threads

Mutexes are often used to protect shared data between threads. To share a `Mutex<T>` between threads, you can wrap it in an `Arc` (atomic reference counted) pointer. Here's an example:

```rust
use std::sync::{Arc, Mutex};
use std::thread;

fn main() {
    let m = Arc::new(Mutex::new(5));
    let mut handles = vec![];

    for _ in 0..10 {
        let m = Arc::clone(&m);
        let handle = thread::spawn(move || {
            let mut num = m.lock().unwrap();
            *num += 1;
        });
        handles.push(handle);
    }

    for handle in handles {
        handle.join().unwrap();
    }

    println!("m = {:?}", m);
}
```

In this case `Arc` cannot be exchanged with `Rc` because `Rc` is not thread-safe. The `Arc` type provides a thread-safe reference-counted pointer, allowing multiple threads to share ownership of the same `Mutex<T>`. The `Arc::clone(&m)` line creates a new reference to the same mutex, which can be safely shared between threads.

### Atomic operations

Atomic operations are low-level operations that allow you to perform read-modify-write operations on shared data without using locks. There is an entire module in the standard library dedicated to atomic types: `std::sync::atomic`. These types are useful for implementing lock-free data structures and algorithms.

### Similarities between `RefCell<T>`/`Rc<T>` and `Mutex<T>`/`Arc<T>`

As `RefCell<T>` allows for interior mutability, `Mutex<T>` also allows for interior mutability but in a thread-safe manner. Another detail is that, like using `Rc<T>` can lead to memory leaks if not used carefully, using `Mutex<T>` can also lead to deadlocks if not used properly. In both cases, you need to be careful about how you manage ownership and borrowing to avoid issues.

## References

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 16.3: Shared-State Concurrency

Other useful information can be found in the `std::sync::atomic` module documentation: [Atomic Types](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/atomic/index.html).
