# Day 26 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 26 - Rust Roadmap](#day-26---rust-roadmap)
  - [Introduction to threads](#introduction-to-threads)
    - [Creating a thread](#creating-a-thread)
    - [`move` closures with threads](#move-closures-with-threads)
  - [References](#references)

## Introduction to threads

Threads are a way to run multiple tasks concurrently in a program. In Rust, threads are created using the `std::thread` module. Each thread has its own stack and memory space, but they can share data through synchronization primitives like mutexes and channels.

### Creating a thread

To create a thread in Rust, you can use the `thread::spawn` function. This function takes a closure as an argument, which contains the code that will be executed in the new thread. Here's an example:

```rust
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
        for i in 1..10 {
            println!("Thread: {}", i);
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1));
        }
    });

    for i in 1..5 {
        println!("Main thread: {}", i);
        thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1));
    }

    handle.join().unwrap();
}
```

In this example, we create a new thread that prints numbers from 1 to 9. The main thread also prints numbers from 1 to 4. The `handle.join().unwrap()` line waits for the spawned thread to finish before exiting the program. Omitting this line would cause the main thread to exit before the spawned thread finishes, potentially leading to incomplete output.

The return value of `thread::spawn` is a `JoinHandle`, which can be used to wait for the thread to finish and retrieve its result. If the thread panics, the `join` method will return an error, which can be handled using `unwrap()` or other error handling methods.

### `move` closures with threads

When using threads, you may need to move ownership of variables into the thread's closure. This is done using the `move` keyword. Here's an example:

```rust
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    let data = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

    let handle = thread::spawn(move || {
        println!("Here's a vector: {:?}", data);
    });

    handle.join().unwrap();
}
```

In this example, we use `move` to transfer ownership of the `data` vector into the thread's closure. This allows the thread to access the data without any borrowing issues. If we didn't use `move`, the compiler would raise an error because the main thread would still own the `data` vector, and it wouldn't be safe to access it from the spawned thread.

```bash
$ cargo run
   Compiling threads v0.1.0 (file:///projects/threads)
error[E0373]: closure may outlive the current function, but it borrows `v`, which is owned by the current function
 --> src/main.rs:6:32
  |
6 |     let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
  |                                ^^ may outlive borrowed value `v`
7 |         println!("Here's a vector: {v:?}");
  |                                     - `v` is borrowed here
  |
note: function requires argument type to outlive `'static`
 --> src/main.rs:6:18
  |
6 |       let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
  |  __________________^
7 | |         println!("Here's a vector: {v:?}");
8 | |     });
  | |______^
help: to force the closure to take ownership of `v` (and any other referenced variables), use the `move` keyword
  |
6 |     let handle = thread::spawn(move || {
  |                                ++++

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0373`.
error: could not compile `threads` (bin "threads") due to 1 previous error
```

Basically, Rust uses ownership and borrowing rules to ensure memory safety even in concurrent contexts. When you create a thread, the closure you pass to `thread::spawn` must either own its variables or borrow them in a way that ensures they live long enough. The `move` keyword allows you to transfer ownership of the variables into the closure, making it safe to use them within the thread. This is particularly important when dealing with data that may be modified or accessed by multiple threads simultaneously. Indeed, if we try to drop the `data` vector before the thread finishes, we will get a compilation error. This is because the thread still holds a reference to the data, and Rust's ownership system prevents us from dropping it while it's still in use.

Thanks to these rules, the Rust compiler is able to recognize some errors at compile time, dramatically reducing the chances of runtime errors.

## References

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 16.1: Using Threads to Run Code Simultaneously
