# Day 23 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 23 - Rust Roadmap](#day-23---rust-roadmap)
  - [Closures](#closures)
    - [Capturing the Environment with Closures](#capturing-the-environment-with-closures)
    - [Closures Type Inference and Annotation](#closures-type-inference-and-annotation)
    - [Capturing References or Moving Ownership](#capturing-references-or-moving-ownership)
      - [Immutable Borrowing](#immutable-borrowing)
      - [Mutable Borrowing](#mutable-borrowing)
      - [Taking Ownership (using `move`)](#taking-ownership-using-move)
    - [Moving Captured Values Out of Closures and the Fn Traits](#moving-captured-values-out-of-closures-and-the-fn-traits)
      - [Example of `FnOnce`](#example-of-fnonce)
      - [Example of `FnMut`](#example-of-fnmut)
  - [References](#references)

## Closures

Closures are anonymous functions that can capture their environment. They are similar to lambdas in other programming languages. Closures can be used to create functions on the fly, and they can be passed as arguments to other functions or returned from functions.

### Capturing the Environment with Closures

We take as example a program used by a t-shirt company that gives away a limited-edition t-shirt to someone on their mail list. People on mailing list can optionally add a color preference to their profile. The company wants to send the t-shirt in the color that the person prefers, if they have a preference. If they don't, the company will send the t-shirt in the color they have the most of in stock. The company has a list of colors and the number of t-shirts they have in stock for each color. The company also has a list of people on their mailing list, with their color preferences.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, PartialEq, Copy, Clone)]
enum ShirtColor {
    Red,
    Blue,
}

struct Inventory {
    shirts: Vec<ShirtColor>,
}

impl Inventory {
    fn giveaway(&self, user_preference: Option<ShirtColor>) -> ShirtColor {
        user_preference.unwrap_or_else(|| self.most_stocked())
    }

    fn most_stocked(&self) -> ShirtColor {
        let mut num_red = 0;
        let mut num_blue = 0;

        for color in &self.shirts {
            match color {
                ShirtColor::Red => num_red += 1,
                ShirtColor::Blue => num_blue += 1,
            }
        }
        if num_red > num_blue {
            ShirtColor::Red
        } else {
            ShirtColor::Blue
        }
    }
}

fn main() {
    let store = Inventory {
        shirts: vec![ShirtColor::Blue, ShirtColor::Red, ShirtColor::Blue],
    };

    let user_pref1 = Some(ShirtColor::Red);
    let giveaway1 = store.giveaway(user_pref1);
    println!(
        "The user with preference {:?} gets {:?}",
        user_pref1, giveaway1
    );

    let user_pref2 = None;
    let giveaway2 = store.giveaway(user_pref2);
    println!(
        "The user with preference {:?} gets {:?}",
        user_pref2, giveaway2
    );
}
```

The part we're interested in is the `giveaway` method, where the  `unwrap_or_else` method takes a closure as an argument. The closure is called only if the `Option` is `None`. This allows us to avoid unnecessary calculations if the user has a color preference.

We specify the closure expression `|| self.most_stocked()` as the argument to `unwrap_or_else`: specifically, this closure does not take any parameters itself, while its body will call the `most_stocked` method. The closure is called only if the `Option` is `None`, which means that the user does not have a color preference. In this case, we want to call the `most_stocked` method to get the color with the most stock.

```bash
$ cargo run
   Compiling shirt-company v0.1.0 (file:///projects/shirt-company)
    Finished `dev` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.27s
     Running `target/debug/shirt-company`
The user with preference Some(Red) gets Red
The user with preference None gets Blue
```

One interesting aspect here is that we’ve passed a closure that calls `self.most_stocked()` on the current `Inventory` instance. The standard library didn’t need to know anything about the `Inventory` or `ShirtColor` types we defined, or the logic we want to use in this scenario. The closure captures an immutable reference to the self `Inventory` instance and passes it with the code we specify to the `unwrap_or_else` method. Functions, on the other hand, are not able to capture their environment in this way.

### Closures Type Inference and Annotation

Closures generally do not require type annotations for parameters or return values because the compiler can often infer them. However, type annotations can be added for clarity.

```rust
let expensive_closure = |num: u32| -> u32 {
    println!("calculating slowly...");
    thread::sleep(Duration::from_secs(2));
    num
};
```

The syntax of closures is similar to functions but with pipes `||` and more optional syntax:

```rust
fn add_one_v1 (x: u32) -> u32 { x + 1 }
let add_one_v2 = |x: u32| -> u32 { x + 1 };
let add_one_v3 = |x| { x + 1 };
let add_one_v4 = |x| x + 1 ;
```

The compiler infers one concrete type for each parameter and the return value of a closure based on its first usage. Calling the same closure with a different type later will result in a type error.

```rust
let example_closure = |x| x;
let s = example_closure(String::from("hello"));
let n = example_closure(5);
```

This will not compile because the closure is used with two different types, `String` and `i32`, and the compiler cannot infer a single concrete type for `x`. The compiler will throw an error indicating that it cannot determine the type of `x` in the closure.

### Capturing References or Moving Ownership

Closures can capture values from their environment in three ways: by borrowing immutably, by borrowing mutably, and by taking ownership. The closure decides which method to use based on what its body does with the captured values.

#### Immutable Borrowing

If the closure only needs to read the captured value, it will borrow immutably

```rust
fn main() {
    let list = vec![1-3];
    println!("Before defining closure: {list:?}");
    let only_borrows = || println!("From closure: {list:?}");
    println!("Before calling closure: {list:?}");
    only_borrows();
    println!("After calling closure: {list:?}");
}
```

#### Mutable Borrowing

If the closure modifies the captured value, it will borrow mutably. Only one mutable borrow can exist at a time

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut list = vec![1-3];
    println!("Before defining closure: {list:?}");
    let mut borrows_mutably = || list.push(7);
    borrows_mutably();
    println!("After calling closure: {list:?}");
}
```

#### Taking Ownership (using `move`)

You can force a closure to take ownership of the values it uses by using the move keyword before the parameter list. This is often used when passing closures to new threads to ensure the captured data is owned by the new thread

```rust
use std::thread;

fn main() {
    let list = vec![1-3];
    println!("Before defining closure: {list:?}");
    thread::spawn(move || println!("From thread: {list:?}"))
        .join()
        .unwrap();
}
```

### Moving Captured Values Out of Closures and the Fn Traits

Once a closure captures values from its environment, the operations within the closure's body determine how those captured values are handled. A closure can move a captured value out, mutate it, neither move nor mutate it, or capture nothing at all.

The way a closure captures and handles environment values dictates which of the **Fn traits** (`FnOnce`, `FnMut`, `Fn`) the closure implements. These traits define the kinds of closures that can be used by functions and structs.

- FnOnce: This trait applies to closures that can be called once. **All closures implement at least FnOnce** because they can all be called. A closure that moves captured values out of its body will only implement `FnOnce`;
- `FnMut`: This trait applies to closures that **do not move captured values out** of their body but **might mutate them**. These closures can be called **multiple times**;
- `Fn`: This trait applies to closures that **do not move** captured values out and **do not mutate** them, as well as closures that capture nothing. These closures can be called multiple times without altering their environment, which is important for concurrent execution.

#### Example of `FnOnce`

The standard library method `unwrap_or_else` on `Option` has the following signature:

```rust
impl Option {
    pub fn unwrap_or_else(self, f: F) -> T
    where
        F: FnOnce() -> T
    {
        match self {
            Some(x) => x,
            None => f(),
        }
    }
}
```

The trait bound F: `FnOnce() -> T` specifies that the closure `f` must be callable once, take no arguments, and return a value of type `T`. Since all closures implement `FnOnce`, `unwrap_or_else` is very flexible. If a closure doesn't need to capture anything, a function name can be used instead.

#### Example of `FnMut`

The `sort_by_key` method on slices, however, uses the `FnMut` trait bound. This is because `sort_by_key` calls the closure **multiple times**, once for each item in the slice. A closure that only borrows immutably or mutably without moving values out can be used with `sort_by_key`.

The following code snippet demonstrates a closure that captures a value by moving it out of its environment, which means it can only be called once. This closure cannot be used with `sort_by_key`, which requires a closure that implements `FnMut`:

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
struct Rectangle {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
}

fn main() {
    let mut list = [
        Rectangle { width: 10, height: 1 },
        Rectangle { width: 3, height: 5 },
        Rectangle { width: 7, height: 12 },
    ];
    let mut sort_operations = vec![];
    let value = String::from("closure called");
    list.sort_by_key(|r| {
        sort_operations.push(value);
        r.width
    });
    println!("{list:#?}");
}
```

This code will not compile because `sort_by_key` expects an `FnMut` closure, but the provided closure is only `FnOnce` due to the move of value. To fix this, we can change the closure to borrow the value instead of moving it:

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
struct Rectangle {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
}

fn main() {
    let mut list = [
        Rectangle { width: 10, height: 1 },
        Rectangle { width: 3, height: 5 },
        Rectangle { width: 7, height: 12 },
    ];
    let mut num_sort_operations = 0;
    list.sort_by_key(|r| {
        num_sort_operations += 1;
        r.width
    });
    println!("{list:#?}, sorted in {num_sort_operations} operations");
}
```

The `Fn` traits are crucial when working with functions or types that utilize closures, especially in the context of iterators, where many methods accept closure arguments.

## References

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 13.1: Closures: Anonymous Functions that Capture Their Environment
