# Day 5 - Rust Roadmap

Today is entirely dedicated to exercises to be done on your own. Since it can be difficult to think of exercises similar to *real-world* problems, I suggest you take a look at resources such as leetcode or neetcode, allowing you to code something similar to what you would do in a real project.

## Tips before you start

### Standard Library

Given that I'm confident in programming with different languages, I think there's no point on implementing from scratch things already available as functions in the standard library. So, the aim of my solutions is to solve these problems by searching and using the Rust standard library functions, or by using typical Rust idioms. Don't be afraid to search the Rust documentation or the internet for the functions you need.

### Structs

If you went with \*eetcode exercises, you should write your solutions inside a `Solution` struct: to correctly implement the `impl` block for the `Solution` struct, you can follow the example below:

```rust
struct Solution;

impl Solution {
    pub fn function_name(param: Type) -> ReturnType {
        // your code here
    }

    pub fn another_function(param: Type) -> ReturnType {
        // your code here
    }
}

fn main() {
    let param = 0;
    let result = Solution::function_name(param);
    println!("Result: {}", result);

    let another_param = 1;
    let another_result = Solution::another_function(another_param);
    println!("Another result: {}", another_result);
}
```

## Exercises

### Concatenation of Array

Link to: [Concateanation of Array](https://leetcode.com/problems/concatenation-of-array/)

A *standard* solution could have been to create a `Vec<>`, and the iterate twice over the input vector, pushing the elements to the new vector. Using the `Vec<>` type, we can declare without the need of a fixed size.

However, we can try to implement a more *rusty* solution, using the `extend_from_slice` method. The latter allows you to concatenate a slice to a vector efficienlty and without having to convert the slice to a vector. The concept of slice will be explained in the next days.

### Merge strings alternately

Link to: [Merge strings alternately](https://leetcode.com/problems/merge-strings-alternately/)

The simplest solution is to iterate over the two strings, until one of them ends, and then append the remaining characters of the other string. This can be done by using the `chars()` method, which returns an iterator over the characters of a string.

The *rusty* solution is to use a `loop` and a `match` statement to handle the two strings. The `match` statement is a powerful Rust feature that allows you to match a value against a series of patterns and then execute code based on which pattern matches. In this solution, `match` case can handle four possible cases:

- Both strings have characters left, so we append the characters of both strings in the right order.
- The first string has characters left, but the second string is empty, so we append only the characters of the first string.
- The second string has characters left, but the first string is empty, so we append only the characters of the second string.
- Both strings are empty, so we break the loop.

### Set mismatch

Link to: [Set mismatch](https://leetcode.com/problems/set-mismatch/)

The simplest solution is to use a `vec![]` macro to create a vector of the same size as the input vector, and then iterate over the input vector, incrementing the value at the index corresponding to the current element. Then, we iterate over the created vector, and if we find a value that is equal to 2, we store the index in a variable. The missing number is the index plus one, and the repeated number is the index plus one.

Even if the previous solution is pretty solid, we can think of using a `HashMap` to solve the problem. The `HashMap` type is a collection of key-value pairs, where each key is unique. The `HashMap` type is a good choice when you need to look up values based on a key. In this solution, we create a `HashMap` and iterate over the input vector, incrementing the value at the index corresponding to the current element. Then, we iterate over the created `HashMap`, and if we find a value that is equal to 2, we store the key in a variable. The missing number is the key plus one, and the repeated number is the key. In this specific case, this approach is a little overkill, but it's a good exercise to practice with the `HashMap` type.
