# Day 21 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 21 - Rust Roadmap](#day-21---rust-roadmap)
  - [Vectors](#vectors)
    - [Reading Elements of Vectors](#reading-elements-of-vectors)
    - [A forbidden example](#a-forbidden-example)
    - [Iterating over Vectors](#iterating-over-vectors)
    - [Storing Multiple Types in a Vector](#storing-multiple-types-in-a-vector)
    - [Dropping a Vector](#dropping-a-vector)
  - [Strings](#strings)
    - [Creating a New String](#creating-a-new-string)
    - [Updating a String](#updating-a-string)
    - [Concatenating Strings and `format!` macro](#concatenating-strings-and-format-macro)
    - [Indexing Strings](#indexing-strings)
    - [Slicing Strings](#slicing-strings)
  - [References](#references)

## Vectors

Vectors allow us to store more than one value in a single data structure that puts all the values next to each other in memory. Vectors can only store values of the same type. To create a new vector, we can use the `vec!` macro:

```rust
let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```

This data structure has been implemented by using **Generics**, thus the compiler is able to infer the type of the vector when we create it with data inside. We can also create an empty vector and then push values into it, but in that case, we need to specify the type of the vector:

```rust
let mut v: Vec<i32> = Vec::new();
v.push(5);
v.push(6);
v.push(7);
v.push(8);
```

### Reading Elements of Vectors

To read elements of a vector, we can use the index of the element we want to access:

```rust
let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let third: &i32 = &v[2];
println!("The third element is {}", third);
```

We can also use the `get` method, which returns an `Option<&T>`:

```rust
let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

match v.get(2) {
    Some(third) => println!("The third element is {}", third),
    None => println!("There is no third element."),
}
```

Using the `get` method is safer than using the index, because it returns `None` if the index is out of bounds, that can be handled with a `match` case, while using the index will cause the program to panic and crash if the index is out of bounds.

### A forbidden example

```rust
let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let first = &v[0];
v.push(6);
println!("The first element is: {first}");
```

This code will not compile because we are trying to borrow the first element of the vector immutably and then push a new element into the vector. This is forbidden because the vector might need to **reallocate** when it reaches its capacity, which would make the reference to the first element invalid. The Rust compiler will prevent this from happening by throwing an error at compile time.

### Iterating over Vectors

We can iterate over vectors using a `for` loop:

```rust
let v = vec![100, 32, 57];

for i in &v {
    println!("{}", i);
}

let mut v = vec![100, 32, 57];

for i in &mut v {
    *i += 50;
}
```

Some important points to note:

- We can iterate over the vector immutably and mutably, and both are safe by the means of the Rust compiler.
- We can use the `&` operator to create a reference to the element in the vector, and the `&mut` operator to create a mutable reference to the element in the vector.
- We can use the `*` operator to dereference the element in the vector, and then we can modify it, as we seen in the [Deref trait](../../week-4/day-4/4-04.md#deref-trait) lesson.
- Rust forbids us from modifying the vector while iterating over it, so we can't add or remove elements from the vector while iterating over it.

### Storing Multiple Types in a Vector

If we want to store multiple types in a vector, we can use an enum:

```rust
enum SpreadsheetCell {
    Int(i32),
    Float(f64),
    Text(String),
}

fn main() {
    let row = vec![
        SpreadsheetCell::Int(3),
        SpreadsheetCell::Text(String::from("blue")),
        SpreadsheetCell::Float(10.12),
    ];
}
```

This way, we can store different types in the same vector, but we need to handle the different types when we access the elements of the vector, e.g. using a `match` statement.

### Dropping a Vector

When a vector goes out of scope, it will be dropped, and its elements will be dropped as well. The correctness of the program is guaranteed by the Rust compiler, which will prevent us from accessing the vector after it has been dropped.

```rust
{
    let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4];
    // do stuff with v
} // <- v goes out of scope and is freed here
```

## Strings

First of all, we define as a **growable**, **mutable**, **owned**, **UTF-8 encoded** string type in Rust, even though when we refer to "strings" in Rust, we usually mean both `String` and `str` types.

### Creating a New String

We can create a new empty string using the `String::new` method:

```rust
let mut s = String::new();
```

We can also create a new string using the following, equivalent methods:

```rust
let data = "initial contents";
let s = data.to_string();
let s = "initial contents".to_string();
let s = String::from("initial contents");
```

### Updating a String

We can update a string by using the `push_str` and `push` methods:

```rust
let mut s = String::from("foo");
s.push_str("bar");

let mut s = String::from("lo");
s.push('l');
```

### Concatenating Strings and `format!` macro

We can also concatenate strings using the `+` operator:

```rust
let s1 = String::from("Hello, ");
let s2 = String::from("world!");

let s3 = s1 + &s2; 
```

Pay attention to the `&` operator in the `+` operation. The `+` operator takes ownership of the first string, so we can't use it again after the operation. The `&` operator borrows the second string, so we can use it again after the operation. The reason for this is that the `+` operator calls the `fn add(self, s: &str) -> String` method, which takes ownership of the first string. The `&` operator borrows the second string, so it can be used again after the operation.

Another possibility is to concatenate strings using the `format!` macro:

```rust
let s1 = String::from("tic");
let s2 = String::from("tac");
let s3 = String::from("toe");

let s = format!("{s1}-{s2}-{s3}");
//equivalent to 
//let s = s1 + "-" + &s2 + "-" + &s3;
```

### Indexing Strings

We can't index strings in Rust, because strings are UTF-8 encoded, and the index of a character in a string might not correspond to the number of bytes that character occupies in memory. We can use the `chars` method to **iterate** over the characters of a string:

```rust
let s = String::from("hello");

for c in s.chars() {
    println!("{}", c);
}
```

Or alternatively, we can use the `bytes` method to **iterate** over the bytes of a string:

```rust
let s = String::from("hello");

for b in s.bytes() {
    println!("{}", b);
}
```

### Slicing Strings

Usually, slicing strings in Rust is a bad idea, because the slice might not correspond to the number of bytes that the slice occupies in memory. We can use the `&str` type to slice strings, but we need to be careful when doing so. The `&str` type is a **reference** to a string slice, and it is a **view** into the string, so it doesn't have ownership of the string. We can use the `&str` type to slice strings:

```rust
let s = String::from("hello world");

let hello = &s[0..5];
let world = &s[6..11];
```

## References

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 8.1: Storing Lists of Values with Vectors
- 8.2: Storing UTF-8 Encoded Text with Strings
