# Day 11 - Rust Roadmap

**Topics**:

- [Day 11 - Rust Roadmap](#day-11---rust-roadmap)
  - [Defining and Instantiating Structs](#defining-and-instantiating-structs)
    - [Field Init Shorthand](#field-init-shorthand)
    - [Create Instance from another Instance](#create-instance-from-another-instance)
    - [Structs with Tuple-like Syntax](#structs-with-tuple-like-syntax)
    - [Unit-like Structs](#unit-like-structs)
    - [Ownership of Struct Data](#ownership-of-struct-data)
  - [Methods Syntax](#methods-syntax)
    - [Defining Methods](#defining-methods)
    - [Differences with `C++`](#differences-with-c)
    - [Methods with Multiple Parameters](#methods-with-multiple-parameters)
    - [Associated functions](#associated-functions)
    - [Multiple `impl` blocks](#multiple-impl-blocks)
  - [Resources](#resources)
  - [Exercises](#exercises)

## Defining and Instantiating Structs

A **struct** is a custom data type that lets you group named fields of different types into a single type. Structs are similar to tuples, but with a key difference: the f**ields in a struct have names**, used to access their values instead of using indices.

Here's an example of a struct definition:

```rust
struct User {
    username: String,
    email: String,
    sign_in_count: u64,
    active: bool,
}
```

To create an instance of a struct, you can use the following syntax:

```rust
let user1 = User {
    email: String::from("example@example.com"),
    username: String::from("example"),
    active: true,
    sign_in_count: 1,
};
```

We can also declare a mutable instance of a struct:

```rust
let mut user2 = User {
    email: String::from("example@example.com"),
    username: String::from("example"),
    active: true,
    sign_in_count: 1,
};

user2.email = String::from("another_example@example.com");
```

Note that the entire instance must be mutable; you can't make individual fields mutable.

### Field Init Shorthand

If the field name and the variable name are the same, you can use the field init shorthand syntax. Instead of writing:

```rust
let email: String::from("example@example.com");
let username: String::from("example");

let user = User {
    email: email,
    username: username,
    active: true,
    sign_in_count: 1,
};
```

You can write:

```rust
let email: String::from("example@example.com");
let username: String::from("example");

let user = User {
    email,
    username,
    active: true,
    sign_in_count: 1,
};
```

This syntax is especially useful when you're creating a new instance of a struct from a function that returns a struct instance.

### Create Instance from another Instance

You can create a new instance of a struct from an existing instance:

```rust
// user already defined

let user1 = User {
    email: String::from("user2@example.com"),
    username: user.username,
    active: user.active,
    sign_in_count: user.sign_in_count,
};
```

However, this is a bit cumbersome. Rust provides a shorthand syntax for this:

```rust
let user1 = User {
    email: String::from("user2@example.com"),
    ..user
};
```

This syntax means "use the remaining fields from the `user` instance". An important drawback of this syntax its behavior is the same as an assignment, thus moving values from the `user` instance to the `user1` instance, as discussed in the previous days. Specifically:

- `user.email` could be still accessed after the assignment, because it is not moved;
- `user.username` could not be accessed after the assignment, because it is moved.
- `user.active` and `user.sign_in_count` could be still accessed after the assignment, because they are `Copy` types.

### Structs with Tuple-like Syntax

You can also define structs with tuple-like syntax, without naming the fields:

```rust
struct Color(i32, i32, i32);
struct Point(i32, i32, i32);

fn main() {
    let black = Color(0, 0, 0);
    let origin = Point(0, 0, 0);
}
```

The important thing to note is that tuple-like structs are different types, even if they have the same fields and types. For example, `Color` and `Point` are different types, even if they have the same fields and types.

Tuple-like structs can be accessed using the tuple index syntax, but require to name the type when we destructure them:

```rust
let Point(x, y, z) = origin;
```

### Unit-like Structs

You can also define structs with no fields, called unit-like structs:

```rust
struct UnitLikeStruct;

fn main() {
    let unit = UnitLikeStruct;
}
```

Unit-like structs are useful when you need to implement a trait on a type, but don't need to store any data. In further lessons, we'll see how to implement traits on structs.

### Ownership of Struct Data

Structs can contain both owned and borrowed data, requiring, in the latter case, lifetimes to be specified. For example:

```rust
struct User<'a> {
    username: &str,
    email: &str,
    sign_in_count: u64,
    active: bool,
}
```

In this case, the `User` struct contains borrowed data, so the compiler will raise a `missing lifetime specifier` error. To fix it, we can apply the `'a` lifetime specifier to the struct definition:

```rust
struct User<'a> {
    username: &'a str,
    email: &'a str,
    sign_in_count: u64,
    active: bool,
}
```

## Methods Syntax

Methods are functions that are defined within the context of a struct. They are useful for encapsulating behavior that operates on the data within the struct. The first parameter of a method is always `self`, which represents the instance of the struct on which the method is called.

### Defining Methods

To define a method, you need to define an `impl` block for the struct, followed by the method definition:

```rust
struct Rectangle {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
}

impl Rectangle {
    fn area(&self) -> u32 {
        self.width * self.height
    }
}

fn main() {
    let rect = Rectangle {
        width: 30,
        height: 50,
    };

    println!("The area of the rectangle is {} square pixels.", rect.area());
}
```

The `impl` block, which stands for *implementation*, is used to define methods related to the specified struct. In this case, we define a method called `area` that calculates the area of a rectangle.

The `&self` parameter is a reference to the instance of the struct on which the method is called. The `&` syntax is used to indicate that the method does not take ownership of the instance, but only borrows it. In this specific case, the function's signature should be `fn area(rectangle: &Rectangle) -> u32`, but Rust provides a shorthand syntax to access the instance's fields. Methods can also take ownership of the instance, in which case the method signature would be `fn area(self) -> u32`.

If a method wants to modify the instance, it can take a mutable reference to it:

```rust
impl Rectangle {
    fn grow(&mut self, increment: u32) {
        self.width += increment;
        self.height += increment;
    }
}
```

Overloading between fields and methods is allowed, because Rust can distinguish between them by the usage of parentheses in the method call:

```rust
impl Rectangle {
    fn width(&self) -> bool {
        self.width > 0
    }
}

fn main() {
    let rect = Rectangle {
        width: 30,
        height: 50,
    };

    if rect.width() {
        println!("The rectangle has a width {}.", rect.width);
    } else {
        println!("The rectangle has no width.");
    }
}
```

### Differences with `C++`

If you are familiar with `C++`, you should probably know that it `.` and `->` operators are used to access fields and methods of a struct, respectively. In Rust, the `.` operator is used for both fields and methods, because Rust is able to automatically dereference the instance when needed. This is a nice feature, because it makes the code more readable and less error-prone. In fact, the following codes are equivalent:

```rust
p1.distance(&p2);
(&p1).distance(&p2);
```

### Methods with Multiple Parameters

Methods can also take multiple parameters, in addition to `self`:

```rust
impl Rectangle {
    fn can_hold(&self, other: &Rectangle) -> bool {
        self.width > other.width && self.height > other.height
    }
}
```

In this case, we define a method called `can_hold` that takes a reference to another `Rectangle` instance as a parameter. The method returns `true` if the instance can hold the other instance, and `false` otherwise. Since we only need to read the other instance, we take a reference to it as a parameter.

### Associated functions

By definition, every function defined whithin a `impl` block is an *associated function*, because they are associated with the type names after the `impl`. However, it is possible to define associated functions that don't have `self` as their first parameter, thus they are not methods. They are useful for creating new instances of a struct, for example:

```rust
impl Rectangle {
    fn square(size: u32) -> Self {
        Self {
            width: size,
            height: size,
        }
    }
}
```

The `Self` keyword is used to refer to the struct itself: in this context, write `Rectangle` instead of `Self` would be equivalent.

To call an associated function, you can use the `::` syntax:

```rust
let square = Rectangle::square(10);
```

This must be done because the function is namespaced by the struct name.

### Multiple `impl` blocks

It is possible to define multiple `impl` blocks for a struct, each containing different methods.

```rust
impl Rectangle {
    fn area(&self) -> u32 {
        self.width * self.height
    }
}

impl Rectangle {
    fn perimeter(&self) -> u32 {
        2 * (self.width + self.height)
    }
}
```

Even if there are not any restrictions on the number of `impl` blocks that can be defined for a struct, it is recommended to group related methods in the same block.

## Resources

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 5.1: Defining and Instantiating Structs
- 5.3: Methods Syntax

## Exercises

No explicit exercises for this lesson, but I suggest you to have a look to the [Chapter 5.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch05-02-example-structs.html) of the Rust Programming Language book, and try to implement the examples by yourself to build confidence with the concepts explained in this lesson.
