# Day 13 - Rust Roadmap

Topics:

- [Day 13 - Rust Roadmap](#day-13---rust-roadmap)
  - [Introduction to error handling](#introduction-to-error-handling)
  - [Unrecoverable errors with `panic!`](#unrecoverable-errors-with-panic)
    - [Enabling backtrace](#enabling-backtrace)
  - [Recoverable errors with Result](#recoverable-errors-with-result)
    - [Functions that return a `Result`](#functions-that-return-a-result)
    - [Matching on different errors](#matching-on-different-errors)
    - [Deal with the error without `match`](#deal-with-the-error-without-match)
    - [Shortcuts for panic on error: `unwrap` and `expect`](#shortcuts-for-panic-on-error-unwrap-and-expect)
      - [`unwrap`](#unwrap)
      - [`expect`](#expect)
    - [Propagating errors with `?`](#propagating-errors-with-)
  - [To panic! or Not to panic!](#to-panic-or-not-to-panic)
  - [Resources](#resources)

## Introduction to error handling

In Rust, errors hare divided into two categories: recoverable and unrecoverable errors. Some examples of recoverable errors are trying to open a file that doesn't exist or trying to connect to a network service. Unrecoverable errors are things like trying to access an invalid memory location or trying to divide by zero.

Other languages don't actually have a distinction between these two types of errors, and they use exceptions for both. Rust doesn't have exceptions, but it implements `Result<T, E>` to handle recoverable errors, and `panic!` to handle unrecoverable errors.

## Unrecoverable errors with `panic!`

The `panic!` macro is used to cause the program to crash and display an error message. It can be both called automatically by the Rust runtime or manually by the programmer. The following code will cause a panic:

```rust
fn main() {
    panic!("crash and burn");
}
```

When the program panics, it will print a message to the standard error stream, unwind and clean up the stack, and then exit. This is different from the behavior of `Result<T, E>`, which allows the program to recover from an error.

An example of a panic that is automatically called by the Rust runtime is when you try to access an element of an array that is out of bounds:

```rust
fn main() {
    let v = vec![1, 2, 3];

    v[99];
}
```

While in other languages such as C or C++, this would cause undefined behavior, Rust will panic to avoid these kinds of vulnerabilities, called **buffer overflows**.

### Enabling backtrace

When a panic occurs, Rust will print a message to the standard error stream, but it won't show the backtrace by default. To enable it, you can set the `RUST_BACKTRACE` environment variable to `1`:

```bash
$ RUST_BACKTRACE=1 cargo run
thread 'main' panicked at src/main.rs:4:6:
index out of bounds: the len is 3 but the index is 99
stack backtrace:
   0: rust_begin_unwind
             at /rustc/f6e511eec7342f59a25f7c0534f1dbea00d01b14/library/std/src/panicking.rs:662:5
   1: core::panicking::panic_fmt
             at /rustc/f6e511eec7342f59a25f7c0534f1dbea00d01b14/library/core/src/panicking.rs:74:14
   2: core::panicking::panic_bounds_check
             at /rustc/f6e511eec7342f59a25f7c0534f1dbea00d01b14/library/core/src/panicking.rs:276:5
   3: <usize as core::slice::index::SliceIndex<[T]>>::index
             at /rustc/f6e511eec7342f59a25f7c0534f1dbea00d01b14/library/core/src/slice/index.rs:302:10
   4: core::slice::index::<impl core::ops::index::Index<I> for [T]>::index
             at /rustc/f6e511eec7342f59a25f7c0534f1dbea00d01b14/library/core/src/slice/index.rs:16:9
   5: <alloc::vec::Vec<T,A> as core::ops::index::Index<I>>::index
             at /rustc/f6e511eec7342f59a25f7c0534f1dbea00d01b14/library/alloc/src/vec/mod.rs:2920:9
   6: panic::main
             at ./src/main.rs:4:6
   7: core::ops::function::FnOnce::call_once
             at /rustc/f6e511eec7342f59a25f7c0534f1dbea00d01b14/library/core/src/ops/function.rs:250:5
note: Some details are omitted, run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=full` for a verbose backtrace.
```

If we compile without the `--release` flag, we get access to debug symbols, needed to deal with the backtrace.

## Recoverable errors with Result

Some errors don't require the entire program to be stopped, because they can be handled by the program itself. For these cases, Rust uses the `Result<T, E>` enum, which has two variants: `Ok` and `Err`. The `Ok` variant is used to represent a successful operation, while the `Err` variant is used to represent an error.

The `<T,E>` part of the `Result` type is called a **generic type parameter**, which will be discussed in more detail next week: what we need to know for now is that they respectively are the types for the `Ok` and `Err` variants, and they can be any type, thus we don't need to define a different `Result` type for each type.

### Functions that return a `Result`

There exists various functions in the Rust standard library that return a `Result`, such as `fs::read_to_string`, which reads a file and returns its contents as a `String`. This function returns a `Result` because it can fail if the file doesn't exist or if the user doesn't have permission to read it.

```rust
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let greeting = File::open("hello.txt");
}
```

The generic type parameters of the `Result` type are inferred by the compiler from the type of the success value, which is `std::fs::File` in this case. If the file doesn't exist, the program will panic, because the `File::open` function will return an `Err` variant, whose type is `std::io::Error`.

We are then able to deal with these errors by using the `match` expression:

```rust
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let greeting = File::open("hello.txt");

    let f = match greeting {
        Ok(file) => file,
        Err(error) => {
            panic!("There was a problem opening the file: {:?}", error)
        },
    };
}
```

An important feature is that `Ok` and `Err` are brought into scope by the prelude, so we don't need to use the fully qualified name of these variants: in other words, we won't need to specify `Result::Ok` or `Result::Err` when using them.

### Matching on different errors

We can also match on different errors, like in this example:

```rust
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::ErrorKind;

fn main() {
    let greeting = File::open("hello.txt");

    let f = match greeting {
        Ok(file) => file,
        Err(error) => match error.kind() {
            ErrorKind::NotFound => match File::create("hello.txt") {
                Ok(file) => file,
                Err(error) => {
                    panic!("There was a problem creating the file: {:?}", error)
                },
            },
            other_error => {
                panic!("There was a problem opening the file: {:?}", other_error)
            },
        },
    };
}
```

The `ErrorKind` enum has several variants, such as `NotFound`, `PermissionDenied`, and `AlreadyExists`, which can be used to match on different errors that might occur during I/O operations: we can use them to provide more specific error messages to the user.

Let's hypothetically say that the file `hello.txt` doesn't exist: we should consider also the case where there is an error while creating the file, creating new arms in the `match` expression to deal with these different errors.

### Deal with the error without `match`

In some situations, `match` expressions can be verbose and make the code harder to read. In these cases, we can use the `unwrap_or_else` method:

```rust
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::ErrorKind;

fn main() {
    let f = File::open("hello.txt").unwrap_or_else(|error| {
        if error.kind() == ErrorKind::NotFound {
            File::create("hello.txt").unwrap_or_else(|error| {
                panic!("There was a problem creating the file: {:?}", error)
            })
        } else {
            panic!("There was a problem opening the file: {:?}", error)
        }
    });
}
```

The `unwrap_or_else` method is called on the `Result` type, and it takes a closure as an argument. If the `Result` is an `Ok` variant, the method will return the success value. If it is an `Err` variant, the method will call the closure with the error value and return its result. This way, we can deal with the error without using a huge nested `match` expression.

### Shortcuts for panic on error: `unwrap` and `expect`

Other methods have been implemented on the `Result` type to make the code more concise.

#### `unwrap`

The `unwrap` method is a shortcut for calling `panic!` when the `Result` is an `Err` variant:

```rust
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let f = File::open("hello.txt").unwrap();
}
```

Running this code without the file `hello.txt` will cause the program to panic:

```bash
thread 'main' panicked at src/main.rs:4:49:
called `Result::unwrap()` on an `Err` value: Os { code: 2, kind: NotFound, message: "No such file or directory" }
```

The error message is the same as the one we would get if we used `unwrap_or_else` with a `panic!` call.

#### `expect`

The `expect` method is similar to `unwrap`, but it allows us to specify a custom error message:

```rust
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let f = File::open("hello.txt").expect("Failed to open hello.txt: file not found");
}
```

This code will panic with the message `Failed to open hello.txt: file not found`:

```bash
thread 'main' panicked at src/main.rs:5:10:
Failed to open hello.txt: file not found: Os { code: 2, kind: NotFound, message: "No such file or directory" }
```

Usually, `expect` is preferred over `unwrap` because it allows us to provide more information about the error to the user.

### Propagating errors with `?`

When we are writing a function that returns a `Result`, we can use the `?` operator to propagate the error to the caller. Look at the following example:

```rust
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::{self, Read};

fn read_username_from_file() -> Result<String, io::Error> {
    let username_file_result = File::open("hello.txt");

    let mut username_file = match username_file_result {
        Ok(file) => file,
        Err(e) => return Err(e),
    };

    let mut username = String::new();

    match username_file.read_to_string(&mut username) {
        Ok(_) => Ok(username),
        Err(e) => Err(e),
    }
}
```

It is quite verbose to propagate the error manually, so we can use the `?` operator to make the code more concise:

```rust
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::{self, Read};

fn read_username_from_file() -> Result<String, io::Error> {
    let mut username_file = File::open("hello.txt")?;
    let mut username = String::new();
    username_file.read_to_string(&mut username)?;
    Ok(username)
}
```

How does the `?` operator work? Its behavior is similar to the `match` expression: if the `Result` is an `Ok` variant, the method will return the success value. If it is an `Err` variant, the method will return the error value from the function, which will be propagated to the caller as we used the `return` keyword.

Even though the `?` operator is concise, it has some limitations we should take into account:

- we can only use ? in functions that return a compatible type, like `Result` or `Option`. If the function returns `()`, using `?` on a `Result` causes a compile error, because there’s nowhere to send the error;
- For `Option<T>`, the `?` operator returns early with `None` if the value is `None`;
- In `main`, we can also change your signature to return a `Result`, so `?` will work there too. When main returns `Ok(())`, the program exits with success code `0`; returning an `Err` exits with a nonzero code.

## To panic! or Not to panic!

When our code encounters an unexpected situation or invalid state from which it cannot safely recover, calling `panic!` is often the most direct approach. By panicking, we halt execution immediately rather than attempting to proceed under potentially harmful conditions. However, this choice prevents any form of graceful recovery—once we call `panic!`, the process is forced to stop.

Returning a `Result` instead of panicking gives calling code the ability to decide what to do if something goes wrong. Our function might fail, but the calling code can still recover in a way that fits its context. In prototypes, tests, or examples, panicking can be a quick solution: for small code snippets, error handling could obscure the main idea, and in tests, we usually want the test to fail fast if something unexpected happens.

We sometimes have extra knowledge that the compiler does not. In such cases—such as hard-coded values that are guaranteed to be valid—using methods like `unwrap` or `expect` to produce a panic might be acceptable. It can be helpful to document why we believe an `Err` is impossible so anyone reading the code knows the assumption we’re making. For instance, if we parse a hard-coded IP address, we can call `expect("Hardcoded IP address should be valid")` without adding extra logic to handle errors we know can’t occur.

We generally panic if continuing could lead to corrupt data, security issues, or inconsistencies. Specifically, if our code depends on assumptions that are violated by bad inputs (for example, an out-of-bounds index), we should stop immediately because we no longer meet the function’s requirements. On the other hand, if failures are genuinely expected—like invalid user input or network timeouts—returning a `Result` is more appropriate. This tells the caller, “We tried, and here’s what went wrong. Do with it what you will.”

Sometimes, to ensure certain values are always valid, we can design custom types that check their fields. For example, in a guessing game, rather than verifying every guess is between 1 and 100 in every function, we can create a `Guess` struct that enforces this range in its constructor. This way, any function receiving a `Guess` can rely on it already being correct, and panic only if the caller tries to violate the range contract.

In short, `panic!` is for irrecoverable or catastrophic errors, while `Result` is our friend for scenarios in which we want the caller to decide how to handle a problem. By balancing these two strategies, we make our Rust programs more robust and maintainable.

## Resources

From the [Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/):

- 9.1: Unrecoverable Errors with `panic!`
- 9.2: Recoverable Errors with `Result`
- 9.3: To `panic!` or Not to `panic!`
